A Little Correction About Special Relativity
By Christian Suavet
christian.suavet.06@gmail.com
Abstract :
A small experimental inaccuracy could be the cause of a conceptual error in special
relativity, an error which could hinder the resolution of problems in physics and cosmology.
INTRODUCTION :
« Everything is relative  » is the mythical sentence attributed to Albert Einstein. Yet
the theory of relativity is based on an absolute which is the constancy of the speed of light.
How can we reconcile an absolute value with the relativity of time and space ? Does the
absolute notion make sense when all parameters are variable ?
Max Planck already thought that the theory of relativity was a misnomer because it
was based on an absolute : «  If space and time lose their absolute nature, it is not expelled
from the universe. It is withdrawn further, in the metric of the four-dimensional continuous
that units space and time, through the speed of light  ».  He even came to question the
sustainability of Einstein's relativity : « Who can assure us that a concept which we now
regard as absolute, must not be considered later on as relative, from a new point of view ?  »
[1].
More recently, physicists are questioning the validity of special relativity : «  We
talked at length about these paradoxes  [of physics].  The root of the problem was clearly
special  relativity.  [...]  To  build  a  coherent  theory,  we  must  begin  abandoning  special
relativity » [2].
1. The history :
Between  1881  and  1887  Albert  Michelson  and  Edward  Morley  conducted  an
experiment that was supposed to explain the propagation of light by the existence of a
luminiferous ether, absolute reference to any movement in the universe. This experiment
measured the speed of light in two perpendicular directions, and was conceived to reveal a
variation of 30 km/s, because the speed of the Earth around the sun was supposed adding or
subtracting to the speed of light measured in a direction parallel to the movement of the
Earth,  which  is  not  the  case  with  a  measurement  perpendicular  to  that  of  the  Earth.
However, no difference was found in the measurements. The experiment was repeated many
times to always give the same result, which inspired Einstein the brilliant idea which led to
the  development  of  the  theory  of  special  relativity  in  1905:  if  the  speed  of  light  is
independent of the speed of the Earth, it is space and time that are changing. The speed of
light therefore is not added to that of the Earth, as expressed by Einstein: «  In empty space
light is always  propagated with a definite velocity which is independent of the state of
motion of the emitting body » [3].
2. A risky extrapolation :
The lack of difference in measurements of the speed of light during the experiments
of Michelson-Morley, led Einstein to believe that the speed of light is constant in any frame
of reference : « Light when measured in the moving system always travels at the constant
speed V [which was later named c] as required by the principle of the constancy of the speed
1of light and the principle of relativity  » [4].
To be able to verify it, we have to measure the speed of light before and after a
change of the frame. There are only two ways to change frame, either by a change of speed
or by a change of the gravitational field (ie enter into a less or more intense
gravitational field as for example that of a black hole, but nobody knew it before 1915 and it
was and it is still rather complicated to experiment). The problem in the Michelson-Morley
experiment is that when we measure the speed of light in perpendicular directions, we stay
in  the  same  frame  :  the  frame  of  the  Earth  moving  in  a  constant  speed.  The
misunderstanding is here : To state that the speed of light is not added to the speed of the
one  who  measures  it  and  to  deduce  that  it  is  constant  in  all  frames,  without  having
experienced it by a change of frame is a baseless extrapolation.
3. Inconsistencies in different points of views :
Let's take a specific example to clarify the issue at best. Let us place a traveler who
moves at the speed of 259,627 km/s, that is 86% of the speed of light. At this speed, the ratio
between the time of an observer on Earth and the time of the traveler is 2, ie a second for the
traveler has the same length as two seconds for the stationary observer. Looking through a
porthole of his ship, the traveler perceives the events of the universe accelerated twice.
All this is well known and has been observed on particles. The extension of their ''
life '' due to time dilation corresponds to what is predicted by the theory. From his point of
view the traveler perceives his own speed in the universe accelerated twice, and that is what
makes that journey twice less long than the observer would perceive on Earth and when he
returns to Earth he has aged less. As the speed of light must be in principle an absolute
constant, the traveler sees himself at twice 0,86c ie to 0,98c considering the addition of
velocities in relativity. So each observer (the observer on Earth and the traveler himself)
gives the traveler a different coefficient
of dilation of time : for the observer on Earth the coefficient is 2, for the traveler who from
his own point of view moves at 0,98c it is 6.6. There is an inconsistency of points of view. It
is essential that each observer perceives the same coefficient of dilation of time between
them, so the ratio v/c (0.86 in this example) must be the same from the perspective of each
one. If the two observers talk among themselves, the observer on Earth hears the traveler
speaking twice more slowly, so the traveler must hear the observer on Earth speaking to him
twice faster but not 6.6 times.
4. Can we wonder whether the speed of light can vary ?
There are two ways to give the point of view of each observer for each one perceive
the speed of the traveler at 0,86c, it is either assumed that the time dilation does not exist,
which would amount to return to Newton's  theory and its proved inconsistencies  with
respect to a finite speed of light, or to consider that the speed of light is not an absolute
constant.
Special  relativity  shows  that  time  passes  more  slowly  for  a  traveler  than  for  a
stationary observer, which means that the unit of time of the traveler from the point of view
of a stationary observer is longer, so during a longer second, light should go more distance.
The speed of light must appear variable to any observer who changes frame of reference,
not by adding it to its own speed, but varying in proportion to the dilation coefficient of
time.
2γ = 1 / √ ( 1 – v2/c2 )
So the speed of light is not an absolute constant, but a constant relative to the frame
of reference of the observer. To calculate it from the point of view of a moving observer, the
speed of light must be increased by the factor of time dilation of the observer :
So let's call c' the speed of light from the point of view of a traveler :
c' = γ c
v is the velocity of the traveler, we have:
c' = c / √ ( 1 – v2/c2 )
The variability of the speed of light depending on the time dilation coefficient of the
one who measures it, does not contradict the Einstein's assertion. The speed of light is
independent of the speed of the emitting body. If we measure the speed of a light emitted
from a motionless source or issued from a traveler who turns on the front or the rear lights
of his ship, we always find the same speed : c. If the traveler in the example at 0,86c
measures the speed of a light emitted from a stationary observer, he will find the same value
as for a source of light emitted from his ship, either towards front, back or sides; if he
repeats in his ship the Michelson-Morley experiment he will still always find the same value
: 2c, and he will also say that the
speed of light does not depend on the speed of the emitting body. To generalize to all
frames, the speed of light is not equal to c, but to γc. Our frame on Earth corresponds to the
particular  case  with  γ  =  1,  or  more  precisely  γ  ≈  1,  because  we  are  not  absolutely
motionless, that is what will allow us to demonstrate it.
5. How to provide experimental evidence :
Earth orbits around the sun, so our speed in the universe changes during the year, and
we should be able to check if the speed of light after a change of frame appears constant or
not. The absence of luminiferous ether has certainly been what inspired Einstein the idea of
relativity of motion, so the concept of absolute velocity in the universe was not acceptable
to him. The relativity of motion means that two moving observers can only move relatively
to each other and not relativrly to a universal frame. But the absence of ether does not
necessarily mean that there is no universal frame. In the universe there is no reference of
position, but there is a reference of speed. This frame is shown by the cosmic background
radiation detected in 1965, ten years after Einstein's death, and photographed for the first
time in 1992 by the satellite Cobe. This image is in the history of mankind, an event as
important as the first steps of man on the moon. From this cosmological background, we can
deduce our speed in the universe according to the redshift of the radiation measured in
different directions. Any change in our speed in the universe, should result in a change in
the coefficient of dilatation of the time we live in everyday life, and thus affect a change in
our perception of the speed of light. Every year, when the speed of the Earth is added to that
of the solar system around the galaxy, we are ourselves in the position of travelers compared
to our situation six months before or later, when the speed of the Earth is subtracted from
3that of the solar system. Michelson and Morley should have detected a difference, not
between two measurements in two perpendicular directions, but between two measurements
six months apart.
6. Calculation of the variation of c :
Let's calculate the value of this difference :
The Earth moves at the speed of 29.75 km/s [5] around the sun. Every six months it
changes its direction, what doubles the difference of speed.
The sun revolves around our galaxy, carrying with it the planets. The speed of the
Earth does not add itself to the full speed of the solar system around the galaxy because
there is an angle of 60.2° between the galactic plane and ecliptic plane. In the calculation of
the halfyearly variation of c, we must take into account the cosine of this angle, which
reduces it by about half.
Thus we get :
Δc = c / √[ 1 – (2 v.cos a)2/c2 ] – c
c : speed of light = 299,792.458 km/s
1 / √( 1 – v2/c2 ) : coefficient of dilatation of time. v is replaced here by : 2v.cos a
v : speed of revolution of the Earth around the sun = 29.75 km/s
a : angle of 60.2 degrees between the galactic and the ecliptic plane.
cos a = 0.49697
2 : multiplier coeficient to reflect the change of direction of movement of the Earth around
the sun. At this speed scale, we can consider that the speeds add up, and that there is no
difference between the sum of the classical and relativistic speeds (the difference in the
result appears on a scale less than the millimeter).
After calculation, we obtain :
Δc = 1.46 m/s
The speed of light is varying of 1.46 m/s every six months, to return to its initial
value after a year. Then we understand why Michelson and Morley did not detect any
difference. 1.46 m/s compared to 299,792,458 m/s was completely undetectable at the time
(the accuracy of measurements of c was in the order of a few kilometers, which was already
noteworthy) and this error, or rather this small inaccuracy, let the speed of light appear as an
absolute constant instead of a relative constant, which led Einstein to a misinterpretation.
This difference is even difficult to measure today because the speed of light is the
reference for accuracy measurements. It was fixed once and for all in 1983 and is used as a
standard for measurements relating to space or time. We will have to wait until one day
technology requires such precision that anomalies are detected that indicate that every six
months the meter or the second varies by a half hundred millionth ( 1/205,337,300 ). Such
as one day in the distance Earth-Moon we'll find an annual anomaly that corrects itself after
six months, or the day we'll wonder why we found more precision in the GPS at a specific
time of year and a little less at another one, or when we ask why during space missions at
least six months, ordered from Earth, we always have an error of position which fluctuates
abnormally by itself every six months from zero to several kilometers, and when it raises
4enough problems for us to talk about the issue. And still, we'll have to make the connection
between the periodicity of the anomalies and a change in the spatio-temporal frame of
reference of the Earth during the year.
Besides having established the speed of light to the accuracy of the meter, is it not a
sign that a variation of it could have been taken for an inaccuracy in the measures ?
7. Conditions to the limits :
A variation of 1.46 m/s compared to 299,792,458 m/s, is a detail, a trifle, in our scale
of speeds but everything changes when approaching limits. Imagine a traveler whose speed
approaches the speed of light. The dilation coefficient of his own time tends to the infinite,
so his speed from his own point of view tends to the infinite, as the speed of light always
from the perspective of the traveler tends to infinite, the traveler can still accelerate without
ever reaching it.
If the speed of the traveler tends to the infinite, the duration of the trip tends to zero.
Besides Einstein in his famous 1905 article "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies"
noted that « the speed of light plays the physical role of an infinitely high speed.  »
Karl Schwarzschild went further. In February 1916, he wrote about the critical radius
of a star below which one ends up at a singularity that would later be called a "black hole":
"The value of the pressure increases in direct proportion to the speed of light. At the center
of the sphere, the speed of light and the pressure become infinite."  [6] He had discovered by
calculation that the speed of light cannot be an absolute constant. Despite the accuracy of
the calculations that resulted from it, this little sentence has been forgotten by science. Karl
Schwarzschild died shortly afterward.
For a massless particle that travels at the speed of light like the photon, the speed of
light is infinite and the universe is punctual. For massless particles, the highest possible
speed is infinite, and from their point of view the universe is punctual, so this speed is also
zero. The concepts of speed and distance have no meaning for a massless particle. When all
parameters  tend  to  the  infinite  or  zero  a  speed  of  light  at  300,000  km/s  would  be
meaningless.
With the concept of relative constant, the traveler and the motionless observer have
each one the same point of view in relation with the speed of light in their own frame. In
this example near the limits, the observer still finds that the speed of the traveler goes to 100
% of a speed of light at 299,792 km/s, the traveler finds his own speed tends to 100 % of a
speed of light which tends to the infinite. The ratio v/c from the point of view of the
stationary observer, and the ratio v'/c' from the point of view of the traveler are the same.
When all parameters are variable, a constant cannot be an absolute numerical value.
This is not the velocity of light which is the same for a traveler and a stationary observer,
that is the same it is the ratio between the speed of each observer and the speed of light of
their own frame, such as they could measure themselves. Whether the speed of an observer
is less, equal, or higher than a traveler's, the coherence of the universe for all observers
requires that the ratio v/c be the same for all observers in any frame, which cannot be the
case with an absolute constant c.
If the theory is valid even to its limits, we can wonder whether all that has been taken
for singularities of physics, was not the consequence on general relativity of this conceptual
error in special relativity.
5A speed is a distance run in a certain time (v = d/t).
When we write :
c = 300,000 km/s, we write an equality to the form :
v = d/t
Since Einstein we have known that the unit of time  t  is not the same for each
observer in relation with each one's frame. It is essential to realize that the fact because of  t
is a variable which appears as a constant in any frame (whether our second is long or short,
it always seems to have the same duration), when we measure the speed of light, we don't
directly measure  v  but  d  which must therefore vary in the same proportions as  t,
otherwise  v  can't be a constant.
So c can neither be named an absolute constant nor a variable but a relative contant.
8. How to experiment the variation of c :
To verify the six-monthly variation of 1.46 m/s in the speed of light, one must choose
the right periods. It is on December 17 that the trajectory of the sun around the galaxy and
that of the Earth around the sun have tangents on parallel planes and go in the same
direction. It is on this day, or as close as possible to this day, that the speed of light must be
measured and compared with a measurement six months later, i.e. June 17 (or 18 depending
on the year), because these are the two days when the speed of the Earth is added to or
subtracted from that of the sun with the greatest amplitude.
When the variation of the speed of light is distributed over six months, it is found that
c increases or decreases every day for about 8 mm/s, with a distribution that follows the
same principle as the change in day length all around the year. Compare the measurement of
speed  of  light  in  mid-March,  and  six  month  later,  in  mid-September,  would  give  no
significant results (as if the day length was compared mesured at the equinoxes). So, there
are "relativistic equinoxes", in mid-March and mid-September, with a medium speed of
light, and "relativistic solstices" in mid-December and in mid-June, when we can measure
the maximum amplitude of 1.46 m/s of the variation of the speed of light.
9. Other variations of c :
Our local group of galaxies is moving at about 600 km/s towards a "Great Attractor"
localized in the Coma cluster. The sun moves at 217 km/s around the galaxy in the opposite
direction compared to the one of our local group. So we're moving in the universe :
600 – 217 = 383 km/s (here again, the classical addition of speeds gives us a sufficient
accuracy given our approximate knowledge of the speed of movement of our galaxy). So
there must be a relativistic effect of our speed in the universe, and the speed of light as we
measure it is not a universal speed of light. The one which would be measured by a
stationary observer relative to the universe should be a little lower. To calculate it, we just
have to calculate the coefficient of dilation of time due to our speed of 383 km/s in the
universe, and divide c by this coefficient, as we are in the situation of the traveler, we know
c', which in fact is c, and we look for c that we
might call c0 for speed of light to an observer at speed zero, which corresponds to the
lowest speed of light in the universe, at least in the present universe.
6c0 = c . √ [1 – ( vg – vs)2 / c2 ]
vg = velocity of our galaxy
vs = velocity of the solar system
c0 = 299792.213 km/s or 245 m/s less than c.
The solar system goes round our galaxy in about 250 million years. Currently the
speed of the solar system is deducted from the speed of the galaxy, but in 125 million years,
it will have changed of side and it will be added to the one of the galaxy. Our speed in the
universe will be 2 x 217 = 434 km/s more than at present. We can therefore calculate c m
(maximum c), which takes into account the relativistic effect of our speed in the universe :
cm = c / √ [ 1 – (2 vs)2 / c2 ]
cm = 299792.772 km/s or 314 m/s more than at present.
It should be noted that if the angle between the galactic plane and the ecliptic plane
was 90 degrees, we would not change our speed so not change our frame during the year,
we would therefore have to wait until the solar system has covered a good part of the
galaxy, that is several tens of millions of years, to be able to detect a variation of c.
10. Variations of the other constants :
So the speed of light varies every 125 million years a little more than a millionth
(1/954,313). All physical constants related to time or space must also vary. The
gravitational constant G varies in the same direction. Quantum constant such as the Planck
constant h should vary inversely to relativistic constants. There may be physical constants
that do not vary, they are unitless constants, composed by products or ratios of constants.
There is a constant called the Einstein constant1 which implies that whatever the
values of G and c, G/c2 is a constant, which means that G doesn't varies in the same
proportions as c, but in proportion to its square.
The gravitational constant G = 6.67384.10–11 m3/kg/s2 with an approximation of
0.00080.10–11 m3/kg/s2. As it varies in proportion to the square of c, every six months it
varies from 1/14,329, which gives us a variation of G of 0.00046.10–11 m3/kg/s2. Can't  the
fact that the calculation of the variation of G assigns the same decimal as the approximation
of its measure, be, here again, a sign that a variation of G during the year could have been
taken to an inaccuracy of its measurement ?
11. Consequence on General Relativity :
General relativity tells us that gravitation and acceleration have the same effects. An
observer in a closed room does not make the difference between being in a gravitational
field like that of the Earth, or being in upward acceleration. As we live permanently in the
gravitational  field  of  the  Earth,  the  solar  system,  the  Milky  Way  and  even  the  entire
universe, even still, our perspective is an accelerating traveler's, very low, but permanent. So
the  expansion  of  the  universe  should  appear  to  us  accelerating.  And  the  accelerating
expansion  of  the  universe,  discovered  in  1998,  is  simply  a  relativistic  effect  of  our
permanent change of frame, caused by the gravitational field of the universe. It is therefore
1 C = (– 8π.G/c4)T
7unnecessary to invent a dark energy to explain it.
Being in the position of a traveler in acceleration increases with time the coefficient
of dilation of time, so the constants c and G increase with time, and the accelerating
expansion of the universe accelerates. This well corresponds with observations.
The lengthening of the unit of time in the universe makes us underestimate its age
because we measure it with the current unit of time, while in the past it was shorter. The
closer we get to the origin of the universe, the more the difference becomes exponential and
it is possible that in what we consider to be the first billion years of the universe, in reality
about ten billion years have passed.
The universe therefore has no absolute age, but an age relative to the observer. If
several billion years seem to be missing from the history of the universe, it is because the
slowing down of the speed of the flow of time causes for the current observer a "packing"
effect of past time that is all the more significant as this past is distant [7].
12. Possible objections to the concept of relative constants :
—  If this concept is correct, the Einstein's theory of relativity, for over a century, would
have been at fault !
Answer : If relativity with an absolute constant c has been verified, it is because we
always carry out our experiments in the same frame, that of the Earth with an almost
uniform motion.
In fact, Einstein wasn't mistaken. In the same way as Newton described a particular
case  of physics,  valid at the  low speeds  of our daily life,  Einstein even with physics
expanded to high speeds and gravitation, has limited it to the particular case which concerns
only the observers in our earthly frame. The Einstein's only error was to take this case for
the generality. As long as we do not change of frame or we don't care for a tiny change in
our frame, Einstein's physics have been checked and continue to be considered as the
generality. But we may have a surprise if one day we can measure light speed while we
move at high speed.
— The Michelson-Morley's experiment was remade much later by others with more
modern means and never showed any variation of c !
Answer : Because you find only what you seek. Searching :
1) if the speed of a moving frame of reference adds to c, or ...
2) … a variation of c according to the coefficient of the dilation of time of the observer
which measure it ...
... are not the same experiments. The difference is both technical and conceptual. The first
one, could lead have to discover the second one, on condition, technically, to conduct it with
an accuracy 10,000 times greater than that of the original experiments, to repeat it six
months later (which has been done), and in good times in the year. Three conditions that
were not necessary for the demonstration of the first one, and have therefore not been met
for discovering the second one. And conceptually, still we had to think of searching for this
purpose. Besides Michelson and Morley did not conclude that there was no difference
between the measurements, but the difference was less than that the experiment could
measure.
— Science progresses by attempts to solve insolvable problems in the paradigm of the
8moment. The only problems reported here are simply a problem of terminology outlined by
Max Planck, and the speculations of a physicist at least marginal, who seeks to explain the
inflation of the universe through a supposed variation of c in the distant past. There's really
nothing to put physics in question !
Answer : Why waste time when you know that the problem will be one day. Even if
the problem is not apparently related to relativity, it constantly arises through the inability to
unify current physics and the lack of solutions to the issues of cosmology.
— Chapter 4, on line 88 : " time passes more slowly for a traveler [...] so during a longer
second, light should go more distance. " No ! Because there should be equivalence of point
of views between the traveler and the stationary observer. If the stationary observer sees the
traveler evolving slowly, the traveler should see the stationary observer moving in slow
motion, so the speed of light is the same for both !
Answer  :  This  is  an idea  that  is  usually  exposed in  the  famous  Langevin twin
paradox, of which no less than 54 different interpretations are referenced on the web [8].
Even scientists do not all agree with each other. Why such a lack of understanding of the
phenomenon ? Because the paradox as it is usually exposed is very baddly presented : What
we try to show is that when one twin stays on Earth and the other travels they will no longer
have the same age at the return of the traveler. In the usual story, the traveler leaves Earth to
get close to a nearby star to conduct a U-turn and return to Earth. Since a traveler's time runs
slower than a stationary observer one, the observer on Earth should see the traveler evolving
slowly and logically as the traveler must see events of the universe evolving faster, he
should see the observer on Earth evolving faster. However, the most commonly accepted
idea is that under the relativity of uniform motion that should not make a difference between
the twins' views, each of them should see the other moving in slow motion, which indeed is
true, at least on the outward journey, because the distance between the observer on Earth
and the traveler is increasing. But here there is confusion between the relativistic effect and
a Doppler effect which is superimposed, which distorts the understanding.
There is only one way to isolate the relativistic effect, it is not to make vary the distance
between the observer and the traveler. The traveler must do a circular movement around the
observer.  But a  circular  motion which  has  no  gravitational  cause  is  comparable  to an
accelerated motion. The relativity of motion that concerns only the uniform motions is no
longer valid, and the relativistic effect does not have to be symmetrical, and given the
difference in flow velocity of time between our two observers, without disruptive effect
Doppler the traveler must see the stationnary observer evolve in an accelerated movement
like all events outside his ship.
But we must also consider the case where the traveler revolves around the observer in
a gravitational field, such as the case where the observer would see the traveler in the space
station passing by (to remove disruptive Doppler effect, the observer should theoretically be
at the center of the Earth). Here the traveler's movement is a uniform motion in a curved
space, so the relativity of motion should apply and involve an equity of points of view. But
we can assume that every motion is relative only if there is no absolute frame of reference in
the universe.
However, since the discovery of cosmic background radiation, we know that there is
an absolute speed reference, which invalidates the relativity of motion, and the equivalence
of points of view.
9CONCLUSION:
In the universe there is a highest possible speed, which limits the quantity of space
that can be covered in a shortest time. This niche is occupied by light and other massless
particles at rest. This speed is an indicator of the relationship between space and time in a
given frame of reference. Who changes speed, changes of frame and should measure a
different speed of light, indicating that the relationship between space and time in his frame
is no longer the same. So the speed of light is not c but γc. This is how relativity will be able
to  describe  a  coherent  universe,  but  at  the  cost  of  abandoning  its  two  postulates:  the
relativity of movement and the absolute constancy of the speed of ligh.
Now we can say with Einstein that everything is relative !
REFERENCES:
[1] Initiations physical, Flammarion, 1941.
[2] Joao Magueijo, Faster than light, Free Press, 2008.
[3]  The  documents  collected  by  Albert  Einstein.  V ol.  2,  Princeton  University  Press
(1989).
[4] Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Körper, Annalen der Physik, 1905.
[5] Sources of fig ures : Wikipedia.
[6] Sitzung der phys-math Klasse v.23 Märtz 1916 Mitt v.24, p433.
[7] Paragraph taken from my article published in Effervesciences October 1997.
[8] Wikipedia, as "twin paradox".
10