Born To Conquer (B2C) Entertainment, also known as Kampala Boys, is a Ugandan music group of three musicians who sing together. B2C is made of [Delivad Julio] (born Kasagga Julius), [Mr. Lee B2C] (born Mugisha Richard) and [Bobby Lash B2C] (born Ssali Peterson). Delivad Julio and Mr. Lee sing with soothing soft RnB vocals while Bobby Lash B2C sings the Ragga and dancehall vibes. The three formed B2C entertainment from school as they were students at Crested secondary school in Makindye Division in Kampala. Because of their consistency, the trio decided to start professional music in 2016 with their breakthrough song known as Tokigeza produced by Diggy Baur.


== Collaborations ==
In 2017, B2C Entertainment released a collaboration with Spice Diana, a Ugandan popular musician which increased their fanbase on the local market. Still in the same year, the trio released another music collaboration with Goodlyfe Crew titled Gutamiza which performed well in their career. Gutamiza won different awards which helped B2C penetrate to the lists of top artistes on Ugandan music charts.
In 2017, B2C released a music collaboration titled Kapande with one of the most popular Ugandan musicians known as Eddy Kenzo. In 2018, the trio produced a song with The Ben a popular singer from Rwanda.
In 2018, B2C Entertainment ended their working contract with their brand manager Andrew Mugerwa known as "Andy Events" who claimed to have started the B2C entertainment as a musical group. The music trio claimed Andy events had different dreams and ambitions which could not match their desires.
In 2019, B2C entertainment released another collaboration with one of Uganda's best female vocalists Rema Namakula titled Gutujja produced by Nessim.
In 2023, the trio has released two collaborations which have performed well, they released a song with Ugandan singer Carol Nantongo titled Ndabula and later released another music collaboration with Fik Fameica titled Crazy Company.


== Awards and nominations ==


== Concerts ==
In 2018, B2C Entertainment (Kampala Boys) held their first concert at Freedom City Mall along Entebbe road in Namasuba.
In 2022, the music trio had their second career concert at Freedom City mall. B2C have then announced their third concert dates scheduled for 2024 at hotel Africana in Kampala.


== References ==