Fung Ping Shan Building (Chinese: 香港大學馮平山樓) is a building of the University of Hong Kong and a declared monument. It is located at 94 Bonham Road, Sai Ying Pun, Hong Kong Island, Hong Kong on the campus of the University of Hong Kong. It is currently being used as the University Museum and Art Gallery.


== History ==
The building was constructed in 1931 and was opened on 26 December 1932 by the then Governor of Hong Kong Sir William Peel. The building was donated by Fung Ping Shan, a co-founder of the Bank of East Asia who advocated for Chinese Education in Hong Kong, and was named after him in honour of the donation towards the building. The building was initially used as the University's Chinese Library. 
During the Second World War, the building was used as a dormitory of the first-aid station of air defence at Mid-Levels with anti-aircraft weaponry mounted on the roof. After the fall of Hong Kong and during the Japanese occupation, the building was allowed to keep its academic purpose and was also used as a repository of books for private individuals, schools and government organisation.
In 1953, the Museum of Chinese Art and Archaeology was established with exhibitions being held in one of the rooms in the Fung Ping Shan Library.
In 1962, the book collections of Fung Ping Shan Library were transferred to the newly constructed Main Library of The University of Hong Kong. The original library building was then converted into the Fung Ping Shan Museum, which was officially opened in 1964. It was then renamed the University Museum and Art Gallery in 1994. The museum is the oldest one of its kind in continuous operation in Hong Kong. Its collections include Chinese antiquities, bronzes, ceramics and paintings.
A new wing, the T.T. Tsui Building, was opened to the public in 1996, which was built to integrate with the existing University Museum and Art Gallery.
The exterior of the building was declared a monument in 2018.


== Architecture ==
The building was designed by Leigh and Orange. It is a three-storey building symmetrically constructed with a fan-shaped floor plan and a rounded central section. The facade is mainly constructed of red brick and is decorated with giant pilasters, windows architraves, pediments and moulded cornice and parapet. The atrium features a high-level gallery supported on octagonal columns, which is lit by a prominent skylight on the roof.


== References ==


== External links ==
Library website