Adore: Christmas Songs of Worship is the second Christmas album from Chris Tomlin. sixstepsrecords alongside Sparrow Records released the album on October 23, 2015. He worked with Ed Cash, in the production of this album which was recorded at Ocean Way Nashville with a live singing audience.


== Background ==
Adore: Christmas Songs of Worship is a 2015 Christmas album by contemporary Christian music artist Chris Tomlin scheduled for release on October 23.
The album features new, original songs and familiar favorites, along with guest performances by Crowder and Lauren Daigle.
An Adore Christmas Tour with artists Crowder and Lauren Daigle is planned for December.
In November the song was the No. 1 on the list of number-one Billboard Christian Albums.


== Critical reception ==

Matt Conner, indicating in a four star review by CCM Magazine, says, "The good news is that Adore is an inspired album from beginning to end." Awarding the album three and a half stars from New Release Today, Jonathan J. Francesco states, "it's refreshing to hear some Christmas music that keeps the focus on the Birthday Boy and maintains artistic integrity doing it." Scott Fryberger, giving the album three stars for Jesus Freak Hideout, writes, "it has some shining moments, but it's not enough to warrant a purchase unless you're a diehard Tomlin fan." Rating the album four stars at The Christian Beat, Madeline Dittmer says, "Adore: Christmas Songs Of Worship...point[s] listeners to the true meaning of the holiday season." Tony Cummings, indicating in a seven out of ten review by Cross Rhythms, responds, "with such fine vocal performances and sympathetic arrangements I'm happy to ignore the occasional descent into cliché."


== Commercial performance ==
The album debuted at No. 31 on Billboard 200, selling 13,000 copies in the first week. In its third week of release, the album sold 9,000 copies in the US; in its fifth week, the album sold 11,000 copies; in its sixth week, 30,000 copies were sold, peaking at No. 17 on Billboard 200. The album has sold 90,000 copies as of September 2016.


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Chris Tomlin – lead vocals, acoustic guitar
Ed Cash – keyboards, programming, acoustic guitar, electric guitar, bass, backing vocals
Matt Gilder – keyboards, programming
Matt Maher – programming (He Shall Reign Forevermore)
Ross Copperman – programming (Perfect Light)
Daniel Carson – acoustic guitar, electric guitar
Matthew Melton – bass
Byron House – bass
Travis Nunn – drums
Jim Brock – percussion
Claire Indie Nunn – cello
Jim Hoke – harmonica (It's Christmas), saxophone (It's Christmas), horn arrangements (It's Christmas)
Steve Patrick – trumpet (It's Christmas), piccolo trumpet (It's Christmas)
Lauren Daigle – lead vocals (Noel), guest vocals (A Christmas Alleluia)
Kristyn Getty – Scripture reading (Silent Night)
David Crowder – spoken word and guest vocals (Perfect Light)
All Sons & Daughters – guest vocals (What Child Is This?)
Leslie Jordan – guest vocals (A Christmas Alleluia)
Production

Ed Cash – producer, engineer, mixing
Louie Giglio – executive producer
Shelley Giglio – executive producer, art direction
Brad O'Donnell – executive producer
Ocean Way (Nashville, Tennessee) – recording location
Joe Baldridge – engineer
Josh Ditty – assistant engineer
Vian Zaayman – editing
Ted Jensen – mastering at Sterling Sound (New York City, New York)
Mike McCloskey – art direction
Leighton Ching – art direction, design
Kendra Harrell – design
Cameron Powell – artist photography
Eric Brown – live event photography


== Charts ==


== References ==