KTLR (890 AM) is a commercial radio station in Oklahoma City with a contemporary worship music format. The station is currently under ownership of Tyler Media Group, through licensee Tyler Media, L.L.C. Programming is supplied by Salem Radio Network's "Today's Worship Music" satellite network on weekdays and during off hours on weekends. Weekends consist of brokered programming in English and Spanish (mostly Religious), where hosts pay for time on the station, and can discuss products or services they sell. 
KTLR broadcasts by day at 1,000 watts using a non-directional antenna. Because it shares the same frequency as Class A clear channel station WLS in Chicago, KTLR is a daytimer and must sign off at sunset to avoid interfering with WLS, because radio waves travel further at night. Programming can be heard around the clock on KTLR's FM translator station, K279CR, at 103.7 MHz.


== History ==
The station's original call sign was KBYE, signing on the air in 1945. It was one of OKC's first African-American formatted stations for many years. The tower, before moving to Britton Rd. and Eastern was located on the same property as Remington Park at approx. 55th and N. Eastern. The studio was located at 9th and Broadway downtown, where the Murrah Bombing site is now. Ownership for many years was by the Lynch brothers.
Under Tyler ownership, the station was then known as KKNG beginning in 1999. On August 30, 2008, the station changed its call sign to the current KTLR.
It carried an Urban Gospel format before making its switch to a talk format in 2007. 

As of May 2024, KTLR dropped most of its talk programs with the shut down of Genesis Communications Network and switched to Salem Radio Network's "Today's Worship Music" national satellite feed. Weekends still feature brokered programming (mostly Religious) in English and Spanish while providing "Today's Worship Music" during off hours.


== Translators ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Facility details for Facility ID 59366 (KTLR)   in the FCC Licensing and Management System
KTLR in Nielsen Audio's AM station database
Facility details for Facility ID 157276 (K279CR)   in the FCC Licensing and Management System
K279CR at FCCdata.org
FCC History Cards for KTLR