Acrimony is a 2018 American  psychological thriller film written, produced and directed by Tyler Perry. The film stars Taraji P. Henson, Lyriq Bent, and Crystle Stewart. It follows a betrayed wife who stalks and nearly kills her ex husband when he becomes successful after she spent her whole life supporting him. Principal photography began in October 2016 in Pittsburgh. Acrimony was released in the United States by Lionsgate on March 30, 2018. It received generally negative reviews and grossed $46 million worldwide.


== Plot ==
Melinda Moore bumps into engineering student Robert during college, goes into a rage and assaults him physically and verbally, revealing her abnormal tendencies. Later that day, he visits her dorm room to return papers that got mixed up in the previous altercation. On the day of her mother's funeral, Melinda and Robert have sex in his RV and start dating. Melinda eventually decides to buy him a new car. Despite not having asked for the car, he accepts it. When Robert does not call her for some time, Melinda decides to call him one night. Robert starts acting in an unusual way, so Melinda visits his RV and discovers him cheating on her with Diana Wells, another woman. Enraged, Melinda rams the RV with her car. She destroys Robert's car before passing out from injury and is rushed to the hospital for an emergency full hysterectomy, rendering her infertile. Melinda and Robert reconcile and marry, despite the objections of her sisters, June and Brenda. Brenda warns Melinda not to tell Robert about the amount of money their mother left her.
For eighteen years, Melinda supports them both, as Robert cannot find work because he is focused on developing his invention. Robert talks Melinda into mortgaging their house so he can build a prototype of a revolutionary self-charging battery he has been designing with hopes to sell to venture capitalist Prescott. Diana, now working as an assistant to Prescott, arranges for Robert to have a meeting with him. After finding Diana's wallet in Robert's truck, June and Brenda tell Melinda that he is cheating on her. Melinda's family runs a catering business and offers Robert a job, warning him that if they miss out on delivering to a client, they will lose their truck contract. En route to his delivery, Robert gets a call from Diana saying Prescott wants to reconsider his deal. This causes Robert to abandon his delivery job mid-route. Prescott offers $800,000 for the design, but Robert wants to license the technology to them instead and declines the offer. Melinda, furious at both Robert's declining and his interaction with Diana, files for divorce and moves in with Brenda. Robert moves into a homeless shelter, but Diana finds out and insists that he live with her.
Prescott later offers Robert a multi million-dollar deal while allowing him to keep the intellectual property, which he accepts. Robert visits Melinda at work, although she refuses to reconcile. Robert accepts her decision but, as an apology, gives her $10 million and buys back her home.
Regretting that she abandoned him, Melinda visits Robert in his new penthouse apartment and attempts to rekindle their relationship, but Diana appears and introduces herself as Robert's fiancée.
Furious, Melinda swears to destroy the couple. She sues them, claiming that the deal with Prescott happened before their divorce, but the case is dismissed. The couple file a countersuit against Melinda and obtain restraining orders. As Melinda's behavior worsens, even her family turns on her as they advise the couple to hire bodyguards and install security measures in their house. Melinda eventually chases the couple away. Melinda retaliates by visiting a bridal shop and destroying Diana's wedding gown with acid. She is caught and sentenced to court-mandated counseling, where she tells her therapist that Robert took advantage of her. Her therapist suggests that she may have borderline personality disorder. Melinda's mental state further deteriorates after learning Diana is pregnant. On Robert's wedding day, Melinda's family and friends are forced to prevent her from leaving her house and ruining the wedding.
Robert and Diana leave on their honeymoon cruise. Melinda sneaks onto the boat, shoots Robert, and makes the boat's crew jump overboard. To save Diana, Robert tells her to take the dinghy and rescue the crew. He then overpowers Melinda and throws her in the water. Melinda returns and attempts to kill Robert with an axe, but is trapped by an anchor pulling her into the ocean and drowns. Diana returns with the crew and comforts Robert.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Filming took place around Pittsburgh and Atlanta in fall 2016. Tika Sumpter originally was cast as Diana Wells, but later left and Crystle Stewart took the role.


== Release ==
The film was released in the United States on March 30, 2018. It was originally titled She's Living My Life.


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Acrimony has grossed $43.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $2.8 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $46.3 million.
In the United States and Canada, Acrimony was released alongside God's Not Dead: A Light in Darkness and Ready Player One, and was projected to gross $10–15 million from 2,006 theaters in its opening weekend. It made $7.6 million on its first day, including $1 million from Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $17.2 million, finishing second, behind Ready Player One, and besting both projections and the $10 million opening of Henson's Proud Mary two months earlier. It fell 51.2% in its second weekend to $8.4 million, finishing fifth.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 18% based on 36 reviews, with an average rating of 3.1/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Tyler Perry's Acrimony might be of interest to hardcore Tyler Perry fans, but all other viewers are advised to make time for another Fatal Attraction screening instead." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 32 out of 100, based on 14 critics, indicating "generally negative reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale.
Monica Castillo of RogerEbert.com gave the film a negative review, writing that "Taraji P. Henson deserves better." Ben Kenigsberg of The New York Times also gave the film a negative review, writing that "the moral of Acrimony seems to be: Leave a bad man, especially one who cheated on you before marriage and leeches off your financial resources — unless he has poured his life into the dream of inventing a self-recharging battery, in which case the bonds of matrimony are sacrosanct and no sacrifice is too great." He further wrote that the film itself was "endorsing the logic that keeps spouses Stockholm syndrome'd in bad marriages".


== See also ==
List of black films of the 2010s


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Acrimony at IMDb 
Acrimony at AllMovie 
Acrimony at the TCM Movie Database