Heartland, known as Burned Bridge in some countries, is an Australian television drama series that ran on ABC Television in 1994. It ran for 13 episodes and starred Cate Blanchett and Ernie Dingo, as well as a large number of Aboriginal Australian actors. 


== Plot ==
Heartland deals with the mystery surrounding the death of an Aboriginal girl and the doubts concerning the guilt of her boyfriend, who is arrested for her murder. It is also a love story between two of the people convinced of his innocence — their growing relationship must survive hostility from both the white and black communities and the obstacles of their different backgrounds, attitudes and cultures. 
Set in a small coastal town against the turmoils of murder, mystery and romance, Heartland follows the people from this seaside community and their battle to restructure their own way of life. Their struggle to restore their self-esteem towards a positive future, despite the obstacles in their path.
Other plot elements revolve around the character of Elizabeth Ashton, a writer arriving in a small coastal community. A degree of suspicion exists towards the newcomer who is ignorant of any underlying racial tensions. This naivety allows her to more easily befriend local Aboriginal man Vincent Burunga. Into this mix is the local police officer Phil McCarthy who seeks Ashton's affections whilst being hostile to her friendship with Burunga, not just as a rival suitor, but because of racial prejudice.


== Cast ==
Ernie Dingo as Vincent Burunga
Cate Blanchett as Elizabeth Ashton
Justine Saunders as Millie Carmichael
Bob Maza as Alf Dyer
Steven Vidler as Phil McCarthy
Shane Connor as Ben Lovell
David Ngoombujarra as Mujadi Burunga
Jeremy Sims as Garth Maddern
Paul Caesar as Macka Hargraves
Bradley Byquar as Ricky Dyer
Wes Patten as Chris Dyer
Rachael Maza as Leila Sutton
David Kennedy as Robert Sutton
Aaron Pedersen as Clarrie Carmichael
Lillian Crombie as Mary Dyer
Zoe Carides as Shelley
Luke Carroll as Jason Sutton
Shane Connor as Ben Lovell
Trevor Jamieson as Nobby
Rhoda Roberts as Dionne
Darren Yap as Dr Nguyen
David Wenham as Warwick Bone
Melissa Jaffer as Meredith Lovell
Harold Hopkins as Jim
Richard Carter as Merv
Danielle Carter as Receptionist


== Production ==
The series was groundbreaking in that it was the first major TV series to be written by Aboriginal Australians, as well as starring many Aboriginal people. It was also one of Cate Blanchett's first appearances on screen, along with a number of other talented Aboriginal actors who went on to have successful careers. Rachael Maza and Lillian Crombie, who had attended acting school together, had their first screen roles in the series.


== Accolades ==
In 1994, Heartland won the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission TV Drama Award, which was presented to executive producers Penny Chapman and Bruce West
Episode 7 won both Best Achievement in Direction in Television Drama, for Julian Pringle, and the Best Episode in Television Drama at the AFI Awards in 1994.
The series was nominated for Most Popular Drama at the 1995 Logie Awards. 
At the ARIA Music Awards of 1995, the show's soundtrack was nominated for Best Original Soundtrack, Cast or Show Album.


== See also ==
List of Australian television series


== References ==


== External links ==
Heartland at IMDb
Heartland at the National Film and Sound Archive