The 1924–25 FA Cup was the 50th season of the world's oldest football cup competition, the Football Association Challenge Cup, commonly known as the FA Cup. Sheffield United won the competition for the fourth time, beating Cardiff City 1–0 in the final at Wembley.
Fans of Sheffield United sang the popular song of the era "It Ain't Gonna Rain No More" during the match.
Matches were scheduled to be played at the stadium of the team named first on the date specified for each round, which was always a Saturday. Some matches, however, might be rescheduled for other days if there were clashes with games for other competitions or the weather was inclement. If scores were level after 90 minutes had been played, a replay would take place at the stadium of the second-named team later the same week. If the replayed match was drawn further replays would be held until a winner was determined. If scores were level after 90 minutes had been played in a replay, a 30-minute period of extra time would be played.


== Calendar ==
The format of the FA Cup for this season had two preliminary rounds, six qualifying rounds, four proper rounds, and the semi-finals and final. This was the last season of the tournament in this format, as from the following season, the fifth and sixth qualifying rounds would be renumbered as the first and second rounds proper (with later rounds also consequentially renumbered).


== Qualifying rounds ==
37 Football League clubs joined the participating non-league teams entering this season's tournament in the qualifying rounds. Two Second Division sides, Port Vale and Coventry City, and 21 Third Division sides were entered in the fifth qualifying round, with the remaining Third Division teams having been entered in the fourth qualifying round.
Both Second Division sides won their first matches (in contrast to previous seasons), while four clubs from the Third Division were eliminated from the tournament in the fourth qualifying round and a further 14 were knocked out in the fifth qualifying round.
However, in a generally unproductive tournament for non-league football, only four League teams were defeated by non-league opponents. Bournemouth & Boscombe Athletic lost to Yeovil & Petter's United in the fourth qualifying round, while Lincoln City lost to Alfreton Town, Brentford lost to St Albans City, and Merthyr Town lost to Weymouth in the fifth qualifying round.
This season's Cup competition was ultimately the first (and only) edition of the tournament in which no non-league sides qualified for the first round proper. The twelve winners from the sixth qualifying round were Barrow, Darlington, Queens Park Rangers, Norwich City, Bristol Rovers, Accrington Stanley, Hartlepools United, Exeter City, Bradford Park Avenue, Doncaster Rovers, Coventry City and Port Vale.
The final non-league side in the sixth qualifying round was Crook Town (as Yeovil had been knocked out by Bristol Rovers in the fifth qualifying round). Crook was the most successful of the 152 clubs entered in the extra preliminary round, defeating Chester-le-Street Town, Craghead United, Thornley Albion, White-le-Head Rangers, Sunderland West End, Stockton and Chilton Colliery Recreation before going out to Bradford Park Avenue.


== First round proper ==
42 of 44 clubs from the Football League First and Second Divisions joined the 12 Second and Third Division clubs who came through the qualifying rounds. Indeed, had the FA not exempted amateur side Corinthian to the first round proper, this stage would have been an all-League affair for the only time in the competition's history. This would also be the last time that First Division teams started at this stage, with significant format changes set to be introduced to the tournament in 1925.
To bring the number of teams up to 64, nine Third Division South sides were given byes to this round. These were:

Watford
Brighton & Hove Albion
Luton Town
Swindon Town
Northampton Town
Bristol City
Millwall
Swansea Town
Plymouth Argyle
32 matches were scheduled to be played on Saturday, 10 January 1925. Six matches were drawn and went to replays in the following midweek fixture, of which two went to another replay. The Tie 2 replay at Holker Street was Barrow's seventh Cup fixture in a month, as the club's sixth qualifying round match against Gillingham had gone to a fourth replay.


== Second round proper ==
The 16 Second Round matches were played on Saturday, 31 January 1925. Five matches were drawn, with replays taking place in the following midweek fixture. One of these then went to a second replay played the following week.


== Third round proper ==
The eight Third Round matches were scheduled for Saturday, 21 February 1925. Four matches were drawn and went to replays in the following midweek fixture.


== Fourth round proper ==
The four Fourth round matches were scheduled for Saturday, 7 March 1925. There were no replays.


== Semi-finals ==
The semi-final matches were played on Saturday, 28 March 1925. The matches ended in victories for Sheffield United and Cardiff City, who went on to meet in the final at Wembley.


== Final ==

The 1925 FA Cup Final was contested by Sheffield United and Cardiff City at Wembley. Sheffield United won by a single goal, scored by Fred Tunstall.
This was the first time a team outside England had played in an F.A. Cup Final since Queens Park of Glasgow in 1885.


=== Match details ===


== See also ==
FA Cup Final Results 1872-


== References ==
General
Official site; fixtures and results service at TheFA.com
1924-25 FA Cup at rsssf.com
1924-25 FA Cup at soccerbase.com
Specific