Moreau Catholic High School is a Catholic high school sponsored by the Moreau Province of the Congregation of Holy Cross. It is located in Hayward, California, within the Diocese of Oakland. 


== History ==
Moreau Catholic High School opened its doors in 1965 to a class of 103 ninth grade boys, temporarily located on the parish grounds of St. Bede's Church. That same year, construction of the permanent campus began at the current location. That construction was completed in the spring of 1967. 
It was the first school to be named after Blessed Basil Moreau, the founder of the Holy Cross Family. The school was constructed with financial and community support from the members of the Diocese of Oakland, the late Bishop Floyd L. Begin and the Brothers of Holy Cross, South-West province. .
At the request of Bishop Floyd Begin, Moreau became a coeducational institution in 1969, with the admission of 177 ninth grade girls. In 1969, as the only Catholic high school serving the Southern Alameda County, the school became co-educational. 
Bishop Allen Vigneron and Hayward Mayor Roberta Cooper officiated at the April 30, 2006 groundbreaking ceremony for a multimillion-dollar expansion at Moreau. The project included increasing the school library, adding a state-of-the-art life and physical science laboratory and classroom, and building a film and video arts studio and multi-media classroom.


== Academics ==
Moreau offers more than 40 Honors and AP courses.  Moreau Catholic is accredited by the Western Catholic Educational Association and the Western Association of Schools and Colleges. 
Moreau Catholic was one of eight schools in California and 54 schools nationwide to be selected as a 2010 Apple Distinguished School. Moreau has twice been named a Blue Ribbon School. 
Some of the courses offered at Moreau Catholic include: AP Biology, AP Chemistry, AP Physics, AP Calculus AB/BC, AP Environmental Science, AP Psychology, AP Chinese, AP Government, and AP Statistics.


== Athletics ==
Moreau is a member of the Mission Valley Athletic Conference (MVAL), the North Coast Section (NCS), and the California Interscholastic Federation.
Teams include:  Football, Cross Country, Girls Volleyball, Girls Tennis, Girls Golf, Girls Lacrosse, Boys Lacrosse, Rally Squad, Boys Basketball, Girls Basketball, Boys Soccer, Girls Soccer, Badminton, Baseball, Softball, Track and Field, Swimming, men's and women's Water Polo, Boys Golf, Boys Tennis, and Boys Volleyball. (Girls Basketball won the State Championship in the 1992-1993 season )


== Visual and Performing Arts ==
The school offers courses in choral and instrumental music, dance, theater, and the visual arts, including and Honors Dance Class.


== Notable alumni ==

Cindy Chavez, vice mayor of San Jose
Brian Copeland, author and comedian
Vanessa Curry, dancer, member of the Pussycat Dolls
Marco Dapper, actor/model, star of Eating Out 2: Sloppy Seconds
Rosa Gumataotao Rios, Treasurer of the United States
Darren Lewis, Major League Baseball player
Steven J. Lopes, bishop of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter
Kevin Nadal, author/ activist 
Joe Trippi, political campaign strategist
Bryn Davies, musician
Adam Copeland, Sports Radio Host KNBR, San Francisco 
Necar Zadegan, actress


== References ==