Pterygota ( terrə-GOH-tə Ancient Greek: πτερυγωτός, romanized: pterugōtós, lit. 'winged') is a subclass of insects that includes all winged insects and groups who lost them secondarily.
Pterygota group comprises 99.9% of all insects. The orders not included are the Archaeognatha (jumping bristletails) and the Zygentoma (silverfishes and firebrats), two primitively wingless insect orders. Unlike Archaeognatha and Zygentoma, the pterygotes do not have styli or vesicles on their abdomen (also absent in some zygentomans), and with the exception of the majority of mayflies, are also missing the median terminal filament which is present in the ancestrally wingless insects.
The oldest known representatives of the group appeared during the mid-Carboniferous, around 328–324 million years ago, and the group subsequently underwent rapid diversification. Claims that they originated substantially earlier during the Silurian or Devonian based on molecular clock estimates are unlikely based on the fossil record, and are likely analytical artefacts.


== Systematics ==

Traditionally, this group was divided into the infraclasses Paleoptera and Neoptera. The former are nowadays strongly suspected of being paraphyletic, and better treatments (such as dividing or dissolving the group) are presently being discussed. In addition, it is not clear how exactly the neopterans are related among each other. The Exopterygota might be a similar assemblage of rather ancient hemimetabolous insects among the Neoptera like the Palaeoptera are among insects as a whole. The holometabolous Endopterygota seem to be very close relatives, indeed, but nonetheless appear to contain several clades of related orders, the status of which is not agreed upon.
The following scheme uses finer divisions than the one above, which is not well-suited to correctly accommodating the fossil groups.


=== Infraclass Palaeoptera ===
(probably paraphyletic)

Ephemeroptera (mayflies)
Palaeodictyoptera †(extinct)
Megasecoptera †(extinct)
Archodonata †(extinct)
Diaphanopterodea †(extinct)
Protodonata or Meganisoptera †(extinct; sometimes included in Odonata)
Protanisoptera †(extinct; sometimes included in Odonata)
Triadophlebioptera †(extinct; sometimes included in Odonata)
Protozygoptera or Archizygoptera †(extinct; sometimes included in Odonata)
Odonata (dragonflies and damselflies)


=== Infraclass Neoptera ===

Superorder Exopterygota

Caloneurodea †(extinct)
Titanoptera †(extinct)
Protorthoptera †(extinct)
Plecoptera (stoneflies)
Embioptera (webspinners)
Zoraptera (angel insects)
Dermaptera (earwigs)
Orthoptera (grasshoppers, etc.)
Phasmatodea (stick insects – tentatively placed here)
Grylloblattodea (ice-crawlers – tentatively placed here)
Mantophasmatodea (gladiators – tentatively placed here)
Proposed superorder Dictyoptera
Blattodea (cockroaches and termites)
Mantodea (mantises)
Alienoptera  †(extinct)
Proposed superorder Paraneoptera
Psocoptera (booklice, barklice)
Thysanoptera (thrips)
Phthiraptera (lice)
Hemiptera (true bugs)
Superorder Endopterygota

Hymenoptera (ants, bees, etc.)
Coleoptera (beetles)
Strepsiptera (twisted-winged parasites)
Raphidioptera (snakeflies)
Megaloptera (alderflies, etc.)
Neuroptera (net-veined insects)
Proposed superorder Mecopteroidea/Antliophora
Mecoptera (scorpionflies, etc.)
Siphonaptera (fleas)
Diptera (true flies)
Protodiptera †(extinct)
Proposed superorder Amphiesmenoptera
Trichoptera (caddisflies)
Lepidoptera (butterflies, moths)
Neoptera orders incertae sedis

Glosselytrodea †(extinct)
Miomoptera †(extinct)


== References ==