Madrasa Manzar-e-Islam (Urdu: مدرسہ منظر اسلام), also known as Jamia Razvia Manzar-e-Islam, is an Islamic seminary in India. It was founded in 1904 in Bareilly, India by Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi.
It celebrated its hundredth anniversary in 2004 this occasion was marked by a series of publications in monthly magazine Ala Hazrat whose editor in chief is Subhan Raza Khan.
He also prepared a plan to upgrade the madrasa in view of the shortage of space.


== History ==
It was founded by Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi, the founder of rivalist Barelvi movement to preach the teachings of Sufism and Barelvi movement. It was then joined by Amjad Ali Aazmi and Zafar Al-Din Bihari, both students of Khan in Sufism. It was the second Educational seminary established on the teachings of the revalist Barelvi movement after Madrasa-e-Naumaniya, which was initially funded by Jamaat Ali Shah.


== Controversies ==
On the International Yoga Day 2023, which created a controversy in Barelvi family and also between religious scholars.
On 15 August 2017, then Shehar Qazi Asjad Raza Khan son of Akhtar Raza Khan, then Grand Mufti of India denounced the order for videography of the program from Government of Uttar Pradesh headed by Yogi Adityanath stating Videography and Photography anti-Islamic. The Madrasa students did not sing National Anthem and sung Sare Jahan Se Achcha instead. Regarding not accepting the order of the Government, Divisional Commissioner of Bareilly district had stated:
Singing national anthem is the fundamental duty of every citizen. If any madarsa had violated the government order of singing national anthem during Independence Day celebrations, they will face action. But madarsas will be asked to explain why they violated the order. ~ PV Jagan Mohan


== Famous Fatawa ==
In September 2007 Darul Ifta of Manzar-e-Islam issued a fatwa, which declaring the Indian film actor Salman Khan and his family as non-Muslims after they were shown on TV placing Ganesh (a Hindu elephant deity) in their house and worshipping it. The clerics of the Darul Ifta stated in their fatwa that Islam prohibits idol worship and the actor would have to recite the Shahadah in order to become Muslims again. However, a Mufti of Manzar-e-Islam clarified that "they were asked their opinion about Muslims who worship idols and participates in idol worshipping processions, nowhere Salman Khan or his recent act was mentioned. The rule of Islam regarding idol worshipping is quite clear and this act is considered non-Islamic therefore any Muslim involved in worshipping anyone besides Allah need to recite Kalma again" and that the question was general and not specific to any person.
In February 2015 the madrasa issued a fatwa against Azam Khan a Minister of  Uttar Pradesh on his proposal to build a temple for his party president Mulayam Singh Yadav. The madrasa said "In Islam believing in anyone other than Allah is illegitimate and so talking about building a temple is equally wrong,"


== See also ==
Jamiatur Raza
Al Jamiatul Ashrafia
Al-Jame-atul-Islamia


== References ==