The Little Mermaid – A Musical Adventure is a musical stage show production at Disney's Hollywood Studios. It is a fully reimagined production inspired by the 1989 Disney animated feature film The Little Mermaid, replacing the classic Voyage of the Little Mermaid which performed almost three decades. The show was originally set to premiere on Fall 2024. However, on October 14, 2024, it was announced that the show was delayed to Summer 2025.


== History ==
Following the permanent closure of the classic long-running Voyage of the Little Mermaid show on March 15, 2020, due to the negative effects of the pandemic, it was announced on December 19, 2023, that the show would be replaced by a reimagined show inspired by the animated film in the newly refreshed Animation Courtyard theater at Disney's Hollywood Studios. It was also said that the show would feature new visual innovative plans to completely reimagine the show telling the story of Ariel longing to be part of the human world. In addition to including the "Kiss the Girl" song as seen through concept art, it was also announced that the show would include songs from the film such as "Part of Your World" and "Poor Unfortunate Souls" with an opening date scheduled for fall 2024.
On June 10, 2024, Disney shared a first look at two new puppets that would be used during the musical and that it was confirmed that the show would use all new puppets. One of the puppets revealed in a sneak peek was Max, Prince Eric's pet dog with another one being a sea turtle with a pink and purple shell. It was also confirmed that this puppet would be used in a blacklight sequence like in its predecessor. In addition to this, it was also revealed that the show would use cutting-edge digital imagery motion capture for the characters of King Triton, Ursula, and Ariel's sisters. It was also confirmed that the song "Daughters of Triton" would be included within the show, which the predecessor omitted.


== Show soundtrack ==
"Daughters of Triton"
"Part of Your World"
"Under the Sea"
"Poor Unfortunate Souls"
"Kiss the Girl"


== References ==