The Kelantan royal family consists of the family members of the Sultan of Kelantan. It currently consists of Muhammad V of Kelantan and his close relations.
The Sultan and his family belong to the House of Long Yunus. The ruling house had founded the monarchy in 1267 and continues to be in power to this day.


== Roles ==
Several members of the royal family are also the members of the State Royal Succession Council (Malay: Majlis Perajaan Negeri) or the Advisory Council to the Ruler (Malay: Majlis Penasihat Raja). The State Royal Succession Council role is to confirm the ascension to the throne while the Advisory Council to the Ruler role is to assist the Sultan in carrying out his duty to the state by acting as an advisory body to the Sultan. Some members are made Kerabat D’Raja Bergelar or in English, royal family members with titles, whom are responsible for any engagement involving the palace.


== Titles and styles ==
The full title of the Sultan of Kelantan is Sultan dan Yang di-Pertuan bagi Negeri Kelantan Darul Naim serta Jajahan Takluknya, or in English, The Sultan and Sovereign Ruler of Kelantan Abode of Bliss and its Dependencies.
The title Raja Perempuan Kelantan may be conferred to a spouse of the Sultan, given that she is of a royal descent. The title Sultanah Kelantan can be conferred instead to the spouse that is not of a royal descent. The regnal name of the consort of the Sultan will be the title, followed by her given name. For example: Sultanah Nur Diana Petra Abdullah.
The heir apparent is conferred the title Tengku Mahkota Kelantan or in English, the Crown Prince of Kelantan. His wife will receive the title Tengku Ampuan Mahkota Kelantan if she is of royal descent. The title Che Puan Mahkota Kelantan can be conferred instead to the wife that is not of royal descent.
The Sultan's mother will receive the title and honorific prefix of Raja Perempuan before her given name upon his ascension to the throne. For example, Muhammad V of Kelantan's mother is styled Raja Perempuan Tengku Anis binti Almarhum Tengku Abdul Hamid.


== Members ==
As of 2024, the members are:


=== Immediate family ===
Sultan Muhammad V of Kelantan (b. 1969) and Sultanah Nur Diana Petra, the Sultanah of Kelantan (b. 1988)(the Sultan and his wife)
Tengku Ismail Leon Petra (b. 2019)(the Sultan's son by Oksana Voevodina)
Raja Perempuan Tengku Anis (b. 1949)(the Sultan's mother)
Tengku Muhammad Fa-iz Petra (b. 1974) and Che Puan Sofie Louise Johansson Petra (b. 1986)(the Sultan's brother and sister-in-law)
Tengku Muhammad Johan Petra (b. 2023)(the Sultan's nephew)
Tengku Muhammad Fakhry Petra, the Tengku Mahkota of Kelantan (b. 1978)(the Sultan's brother)
Tengku Amalin A’ishah Putri, the Tengku Maharani Putri (b. 1984) and Pengiran Muda Abdul Qawi, the Tengku Sri Utama Raja (b. 1974)(the Sultan's sister and brother-in-law)
Pengiran Anak Tengku Afeefah Musyafaah Bolkiah Putri (b. 2014)(the Sultan's niece)
Pengiran Anak Tengku Azzahra Iffatul Bolkiah Putri (b. 2016)(the Sultan's niece)
Pengiran Anak Tengku Zaafirah Muizzah Bolkiah Putri (b. 2020)(the Sultan's niece)
Pengiran Anak Tengku Abdul Muhaimin Bolkiah Petra (b. 2022)(the Sultan's nephew)


=== Extended family ===
(Descendants of Sultan Ibrahim (1897–1960) and Cik Safiah):

Tengku Abdul Halim ibni Almarhum Sultan Ibrahim, the Tengku Laksamana of Kelantan (b. 1943) and Sharifah Azwan binti Almarhum Tuanku Syed Putra Jamalullail, the Tengku Puan Laksamana of Kelantan (b. 1947)(the Sultan's granduncle and grandaunt-in-law)
Tengku Ariez Hazaril (b. 1971) and Tunku Dayang Adelene Bahjah binti Tan Sri Abang Abu Bakar (b. 1975)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Adrei bin Tengku Ariez Hazaril
Tengku Dayang Adeira binti Tengku Ariez Hazaril
Tengku Adyl Hazraque and Cik Shirena binti Hamzah(the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Aressa Helanie and Syed Budriz Putra bin Syed Amir Abidin Jamalullail, the Engku Maharaja Lela Setia Paduka of Selangor (b. 1972)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Syed Aqil Harryth Jamalullail (the Sultan's second cousin)
Sharifah Allyssa Hanis (the Sultan's second cousin)
(Descendants of Tengku Abdul Aziz bin Tengku Mohd Hamzah (1933–2020) and Tengku Merjan binti Almarhum Sultan Yahya Petra (1940–2020)):

Tengku Mohamad Rizam bin Tengku Abdul Aziz, the Tengku Temenggong of Kelantan (b. 1961) and Tunku Noor Hayati binti Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra Al-Haj, the Tengku Puan Temenggong of Kelantan (b. 1967)(the Sultan's first cousin and cousin-in-law)
Tengku Nur Qistina Petri (b. 1992)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Abdul Rahman Petra (b. 1994) and Cik Miera Leydia binti Dato' Sri Kasmi(the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Yahya Aziz Petra (b. 1998)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ramizan binti Tengku Abdul Aziz (b. 1963)(the Sultan's first cousin)
Tengku Mohamad Rizal bin Tengku Abdul Aziz (b. 1965)(the Sultan's first cousin)
Tengku Mohamad Ridzman bin Tengku Abdul Aziz (b. 1967)(the Sultan's first cousin)
(Descendants of Tengku Mohamed Nasrun bin Tengku Yusof (1943–2024)): 

Tengku Rozan binti al-Marhum Sultan Yahya Petra (b. 1942)(the previous' widow)
Tengku Rozanna Petri binti Tengku Mohamed Nasrun (b. 1970)(the Sultan's first cousin)
Tengku Rozlynda Petri binti Tengku Mohamed Nasrun (b. 1973)(the Sultan's first cousin)
(Descendants of Raja Aman Shah bin Raja Haji Shahar Shah (1935–2018)):

Tengku Salwani binti al-Marhum Sultan Yahya Petra (b. 1944)(the previous' widow)
Raja Shah Zurin bin Raja Aman Shah, the Tengku Sri Kelana D'Raja (b. 1961)(the Sultan's first cousin)
Raja Amir Saifuddin Shah bin Raja Aman Shah (b. 1968)(the Sultan's first cousin)
(Descendants of Tengku Feissal ibni al-Marhum Sultan Ibrahim and Nik Sharifah binti Haji Nik Jaafar):

Tengku Mohamed Faziharudean bin Tengku Feissal, the Tengku Kaya Perkasa (b. 1966)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ibrahim Farihaddin bin Tengku Feissal (b 1975)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ismail Fadhil bin Tengku Feissal(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ainura binti Tengku Feissal (b. 1973)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Farini Amalina binti Tengku Feissal(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Farah Aliza binti Tengku Feissal(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Faireen Sadira binti Tengku Feissal(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
(Descendants of Tengku Abdul Hamid bin Tengku Muda Sulong Abdul Putra and Tengku Azizah binti Tengku Mohd Hamzah):

Tengku Iskandar bin Tengku Abdul Hamid(the Sultan's uncle)
Tengku Mahmood bin Tengku Abdul Hamid(the Sultan's uncle)
Tengku Abdul Rahman bin Tengku Abdul Hamid(the Sultan's uncle)
Tengku Anisah binti Tengku Abdul Hamid, the Tengku Keso’ma Mastika(the Sultan's aunt)
Tengku Aizan binti Tengku Abdul Hamid(the Sultan's aunt)
Tengku Aniza binti Tengku Abdul Hamid(the Sultan's aunt)
(Descendants of Tengku Indra Petra ibni al-Marhum Sultan Ibrahim (1916–1983) and Zainab binti Ali):

Tengku Elani binti Tengku Indra Petra(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ibrahim Petra bin Tengku Indra Petra (b. 1955) and Nariza Hajjar Hashim (b. 1961)(the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Ishan Petra bin Tengku Indra Petra(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Imran Petra bin Tengku Indra Petra(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Idris Petra bin Tengku Indra Petra(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Ikram Petra bin Tengku Indra Petra(the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
(Descendants of Tengku Thuraya binti al-Marhum Sultan Ibrahim (1928–2021) and Tengku Azman Shah Al-Haj ibni al-Marhum Sultan Hisamuddin Alam Shah Al-Haj (1931–2014)):

Tengku Putra bin Tengku Azman Shah, the Tengku Indera Pahlawan Diraja of Selangor and Pengiran Hajah Zaliha of Brunei (the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Saidatul Rehan (the Sultan's second cousin)
Tengku Saifan Rafhan, the Tengku Maha Kurnia Bijaya Diraja of Selangor (the Sultan's second cousin)
Tengku Ainul Nur Syuhada (the Sultan's second cousin)
Tengku Nazri bin Tengku Azman Shah (the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Puteri Insani binti Tengku Azman Shah (the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
Tengku Shamsulbhari bin Tengku Azman Shah and Tengku Zubaidah binti Tengku Mohammad (the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Hishamuddin Zaizi bin Tengku Azman Shah and Che Puan Hezeita binti Muhammad Hafidz (the Sultan's first cousin once removed and cousin-in-law once removed)
Tengku Puteri Saidatul Aini binti Tengku Azman Shah (the Sultan's first cousin once removed)
(Descendants of Tengku Mahmud al-Haj ibni al-Marhum Sultan Muhammad IV (1915–died) and Cik Mahani binti ‘Abdu’llah Sabit):

Tengku Zainal Rashid bin Tengku Mahmood (b. 1939) and Datin Zanariah binti ‘Abdu’llah(The Sultan's uncle and acquired aunt)
Tengku Zurina binti Tengku Zainal Rashid (b. 1965)(The Sultan's cousin)
Tengku Zain Rashidean bin Tengku Zainal Rashid (b. 1970)(The Sultan's cousin)
Tengku Zainal Adlin bin Tengku Mahamood (b. 1940)(The Sultan's uncle)
Tengku Zainal Aldrin bin Tengku Zainal Adlin(The Sultan's cousin)
Tengku Putri Soraya binti Tengku Zainal Adlin and Tunku Mahmud bin Tunku Yahya of Kedah (b. 1949)(The Sultan's cousin and her husband)
Tengku Adlina Marita binti Tengku Zainal Adlin(The Sultan's cousin)
Tengku Putri Marilyn binti Tengku Zainal Adlin(The Sultan's cousin)


== See also ==
Sultan of Kelantan
Family tree of Kelantanese monarchs
Family tree of Malaysian monarchs


== References ==