Krishnah Marie Estacio Gravidez (born October 11, 2000) is a Filipino youth advocate and beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned Miss World Philippines 2024. Gravidez will represent the Philippines at the Miss World 2025 pageant.
Gravidez previously represented Baguio at the Miss Universe Philippines 2023 pageant. Finishing as a top five finalist, she was appointed as the country's delegate to the Miss Charm pageant before withdrawing from the competition to represent Baguio in Miss World Philippines 2024, where she was named the winner.


== Early life and education ==
Gravidez was born on October 11, 2000, in Santiago, Ilocos Sur. She began studying industrial engineering at Saint Louis University in Baguio before transferring to the University of Northern Philippines in Vigan to pursue a degree in civil engineering. In an interview on the variety show Wowowin in 2019, Gravidez stated she uses the cash incentives she earns from her stints in pageants to pay for her education.


== Pageantry ==


=== Miss Universe Philippines 2023 ===

On February 18, 2023, Gravidez was introduced as one of the 40 delegates competing in the fourth edition of the pageant, serving as the delegate of Baguio after having previously been selected as Miss Baguio 2022. Her performance in the preliminary rounds was received positively online, with praise directed in her performance in the swimsuit round. In the national costume round, Gravidez wore a Strawberry-inspired ensemble designed by Erjohn dela Serna. The costume was made from Cordilleran textiles and featured a kabayang basket. Her costume reaped her the "Tingog ng Filipina" award for Luzon.

In the pageant proper, she won the Best in Swimsuit award. Subsequently, she advanced to the Top 5, where she, and her co-finalists, were asked "For you, what is the best that we can offer to the rest of the world? Why do you consider it so?", alluding to the Department of Tourism's new branding campaign. She responded:"Having to struggle at a very early age, I have uncertainties. But I've received kindness a lot of times. So now, aside from it's free, I give kindness to everyone. Because this kindness can go a long way, can motivate someone, can give radiance to rainy days. Because this kindness also made me transform myself from a woman who have nothing to a woman who has the universe on her doorstep."At the end of pageant, Gravidez finished as a Top 5 finalist to Michelle Dee, who won the pageant to become the Philippines's delegate to Miss Universe 2023. Following Gravidez's finish at the Miss Universe Philippines 2023 pageant, she was appointed as Miss Charm Philippines 2024 in a ceremony at the Okada Manila. The city government of Baguio issued a resolution honoring Gravidez for her appointment to the title and she was honored with a motorcade organized by the city's tourism office. While Miss Charm Philippines 2024, Gravidez participated at the 12th Mindanao Fashion Summit held at Cagayan de Oro.
On May 23, 2024, Gravidez crowned Cyrille Payumo of Pampanga as her successor as Miss Charm Philippines.


=== Miss World Philippines 2024 ===

As Miss Charm Philippines, Gravidez was eligible to be the country's delegate to the Miss Charm 2024 pageant in Vietnam. Amid uncertainties in the pageant, she announced her withdrawal on June 2, 2024, more than a year after her designation. A day following her withdrawal, Gravidez was introduced as part of the second set of candidates for Miss World Philippines 2024, designated as the delegate of Baguio. In an interview with The Philippine Daily Inquirer, Gravidez said that she had been tapped by the pageant's accredited partner for Baguio to represent the city in the national pageant in April 2024.
Gravidez won four special awards in the charity gala held on July 18. The pageant was held the following day at the SM Mall of Asia Arena, where she would win all three major awards—Miss Photogenic, Best in Swimsuit, and Best in Evening Gown—and seven special awards from the pageant's sponsors. Gravidez advanced to the top 20 through winning the Top Model and Miss Multimedia fast track challenges. She progressed to the top ten question and answer portion, where she was asked "Should inclusivity be a top priority among pageants? Yes or no? Explain your answer". In her answer, she noted the role of pageants as platforms for advocacies and stated that humans must adapt to an evolving world.
Gravidez went on to win the pageant, being crowned by her predecessor Gwendolyne Fourniol and Krystyna Pyszková, Miss World 2023.


== Advocacy ==
Gravidez established the non-profit Colors of Kindness charity, which advocates for the welfare of children and the youth.


== References ==


== External links ==