Irina: The Vampire Cosmonaut (Japanese: 月とライカと吸血姫(ノスフェラトゥ), Hepburn: Tsuki to Raika to Nosuferatu, lit. "The Moon, Laika, and the Nosferatu") is a Japanese science fantasy light novel series written by Keisuke Makino and illustrated by Karei. Shogakukan have published seven volumes since December 2016 under their Gagaga Bunko label. The light novel is licensed in North America by Seven Seas Entertainment under their Airship light novel imprint. A manga adaptation with art by Sojihogu was serialized online via Kodansha's Comic Days website from March 2018 to March 2023 and was collected in two tankōbon volumes. An anime television series adaptation by Arvo Animation aired from October to December 2021.


== Plot ==
With the conclusion of World War II in 1945, the world is divided between two major superpowers: the Union of Zirnitra Socialist Republics [UZSR, the Zirnitra Union] (based on the Soviet Union) in the east and the United Kingdom of Arnack [UK] (based on the United States) in the west. With their borders set on earth, both superpowers look to space as the next frontier for expansion, sparking a space race. However, the Zirnitra Union has a trump card in the form of Irina Luminesk, a vampire who they hope to use as a test subject to spearhead research into achieving the first human spaceflight. In order to ensure her training goes smoothly, the young cosmonaut candidate Lev Leps is assigned to be her handler. While he is instructed to treat Irina as nothing more than a test subject, Lev cannot help but be fascinated with the young vampire girl.


== Characters ==
Irina Luminesk (イリナ・ルミネスク, Irina Ruminesuku)
Voiced by: Megumi Hayashibara (Japanese); Tia Ballard (English)
A vampire girl. She is treated by people as a "cursed race" and hates humans. For some reason, she has a strong will to go to the Moon, and aims to become an astronaut. Over the course of the series, she slowly develops feelings towards Lev due to him treating her like a person.
Lev Leps (レフ・レプス, Refu Repusu)
Voiced by: Koki Uchiyama (Japanese); Stephen Fu (English)
A lieutenant in the Air Force. He has longed to fly since he was a child. He volunteered to be an astronaut candidate. He has a strong sense of justice and rebels against unreasonable things. Over the course of the series, he bonds with Irina, even letting her drink his blood, and falls in love with her. In episode 11, he realizes his dream and becomes the first human astronaut in the series.
Anya Simonyan (アーニャ・シモニャン, Ānya Shimonyan)
Voiced by: Hina Kino (Japanese); Jad Saxton (English)
A researcher at the Biomedical Research Institute. She specializes in studying the biology of vampires. She is in charge of checking Irina's medical data. For this reason, she is not afraid of Irina, and treats her in a friendly manner.
Mikhail Yashin (ミハイル・ヤシン, Mihairu Yashin)
Voiced by: Satoshi Hino (Japanese); Jonah Scott (English)
An astronaut candidate and a lieutenant in the Air Force. Handsome with a good family background. His grades are always at the top, and he plays a leading role. Acknowledged by himself and others as the most promising astronaut candidate.
Roza Plevitskaya (ローザ・プレヴィツカヤ, Rōza Purevuitsukaya)
Voiced by: Mikako Komatsu (Japanese); Kimmie Britt (English)
The only female astronaut candidate. A lieutenant in the Air Force. A former ace pilot who was called the "White Rose of Sunglade." She has a strong competitive spirit, and tends to be harsh to the other candidates around her.
Slava Korovin (スラヴァ・コローヴィン, Surava Korōvin)
Voiced by: Takaya Hashi (Japanese); Mark Stoddard (English)
A genius engineer who creates spaceships for the Republic of Zirnitra. His existence is kept secret from the public, and he is referred to only by his title, "Chief Designer."
Lieutenant Victor (ヴィクトール中将, Vikutōru Chūjō)
Voiced by: Masaki Terasoma (Japanese); Marcus Stimac (English)
An instructor of astronaut cadets and a hero of the last great war. A strong, muscular man with a large face. He is strict, but he is also very compassionate.
Natalia (ナタリア, Nataria)
Voiced by: Kikuko Inoue (Japanese); Caitlin Glass (English)
A matron of the communal dormitory where astronaut candidates live. With her gentle, maternal smile, she treats everyone with kindness.
Fjodor Gergiev (フョードル・ゲルギエフ, Fyōdoru Gerugiefu)
Voiced by: Kenichi Ogata (Japanese); Bill Jenkins (English)
A supreme leader of the Republic of Zirnitra. He came to this position after overthrowing the previous regime. While he has a cheerful and lively impression, he also has a side that silences those around him with a strong sense of intimidation and cold-heartedness.
Lyudmila Halrova (リュドミラ・ハルロヴァ, Ryudomira Harurova)
Voiced by: M.A.O (Japanese) Morgan Lauré Garrett (English)
A secretary in charge of documents for Fjodor Gergiev. A member of the old aristocracy, she is one of the few people who can give Gergiev opinions without hesitation. She always eats something sweet.
Narrator (ナレーション, Narēshon)
Voiced by: Hiroki Tōchi (Japanese); R. Bruce Elliot (English)
An unknown person who narrates the story.


== Media ==


=== Light novels ===


=== Manga ===
A manga adaptation with art by Sojihogu was serialized on Kodansha's Comic Days website from March 8, 2018, to March 3, 2023. It was collected in two tankōbon volumes. The adaptation went on an indefinite hiatus that lasted until January 2023 due to Sojihogu's poor health.


=== Anime ===
An anime television series adaptation was announced on March 17, 2021. The series was animated by Arvo Animation and directed by Akitoshi Yokoyama, with series author Keisuke Makino handling series' composition, Hiromi Kato designing the characters, and Yasunori Mitsuda composing the score. It aired from October 4 to December 20, 2021 on TV Tokyo, BS NTV, SUN, and KBS Kyoto. The opening theme song, "Hi no Tsuki" (緋ノ月, Scarlet Moon), is performed by Ali Project while the ending theme song, "Arifureta Itsuka" (ありふれたいつか, Everyday Someday), is performed by Chima. Funimation licensed the series outside of Asia. Medialink licensed the series in Asia-Pacific, it is streamed on the Ani-One YouTube channel with ULTRA membership, iQIYI, and Bilibili.


==== Episode list ====


== Reception ==
Irina: The Vampire Cosmonaut was awarded the 53rd Seiun Award in the Best Japanese Long Story category in 2022.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Manga official website (in Japanese)
Anime official website (in Japanese)
Irina: The Vampire Cosmonaut (light novel) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia