Peddarikam (transl. Eldership or seniority) is a 1992 Indian Telugu-language drama film, produced and directed by A. M. Rathnam under the Sri Surya Movies banner. It is a remake of the Malayalam film Godfather. The film is starred by Jagapathi Babu, Sukanya, N. N. Pillai (reprising his role from Godfather), and Bhanumathi with a soundtrack by Raj–Koti. This is Sukanya's first Telugu film as a heroine. The film was a super hit at the box-office and was Jagapathi Babu's first successful film.


== Plot ==
The film begins in a village where fierce rivalry is upheld between the families of Parvataneni Parasuramayya and Adusumilli Basavapurnamma, the arbitrators. Parasuramayya detests women and prohibits their entry into his house. Hence, his four sons, Balaramudu, Rama Krishna, Narasimham, and Krishna Mohan, are left unmarried. Destiny makes Krishna Mohan and Janaki, granddaughter of Basavapurnamma, collegians at law college. Meanwhile, Basavapurnamma sets Janaki's match with the Home Minister, which has been withdrawn owing to the influence of Parasuramayya. Moreover, Krishna Mohan and his bestie Prasad heckle & humiliate Janaki in college. Thereby, enraged Basavapurnamma exploits Janaki as a weapon to beguile Krishna Mohan, creating a rift in the Parasuramayya's family.
Thus, Janaki starts her play when Prasad ideates Krishna Mohan to counterfeit her as an avenge. Soon, unintentionally, the feign turns into true love. Knowing it, Veerabhadram, the younger son of Basavapurnamma, an amicable spins back. Indeed, Janaki's mother should have wedlocked Balaramaiah when Basavapurnamma abducted the bride and united with her elder son Sambasivudu. Following this, Parasuramayya's wife is killed in that havoc when the incense leads to Basavapurnamma's husband's slaughter. Listening to it, the love birds backsteps. Afterward, through Prasad Krishna, Mohan learns that Rama Krishna is maintaining a secret family life. He assures him that everything will help nuptial Janaki. Being conscious of it, Parasuramayya assaults Rama Krishna when Krishna Mohan obstructs his way. As a result, he ostracizes them from the family.
Besides, Basavapurnamma is shocked to know that Janaki's love is not a mere act. So, she immediately sets out an alliance with their family lawyer's son. Besides, she is still ruses for the complete elimination ofParasuramayya's clan. In that gameplay, she sends her sons for Parasuramayya's support in preventing Krishna Mohan's wedding with Janaki, which he approves. Then, she attests her aid to Krishna Mohan. Here, Veerabhadram reveals her plan to Krishna Mohan. With his help, he sneaks into the marriage hall and is almost on the verge of knit Janaki when Basavapurnamma curses Parasuramayya. Therein, her foil play is exposed. At that juncture, Krishna Mohan declares that his arrival is not to couple up with Janaki but to protect his father's prestige. A regretful Parasuramayya allows Krishna Mohan to tie the knot with Janaki and welcomes them by paving the way for the women into his house.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==

Music composed by Raj–Koti. Music released on Lahari Music Company.


== Awards ==
Sudhakar won Nandi Award for Best Male Comedian for his role in this film.


== References ==


== External links ==
Peddarikam at IMDb