Aviation Act of 1917 was a United States military appropriations bill authorizing a temporary increase for the United States Army Signal Corps. The Act of Congress authorized provisions for airship or dirigible operations governed by the U.S. Army Signal Corps Aeronautical Division. The legislation provided United States President Woodrow Wilson emergency authority for the maintenance, manufacture, operation, purchase, and repair of airships and associated aerial machines.


== Sections of the Act ==
In an attempt to meet the progressive necessities of World War I, House bill 5326 was penned as ten sections by the United States 65th Congressional session.

Sec. 1 – Temporary Increase of Army Signal Corps and Aviation Sections
Sec. 2 – Additional Commissioned Personnel Authorized
Qualifications
Appointments by U.S. President
Appointments by U.S. President and Senate
Sec. 3 – Additional Enlisted Men by Enlistment or Draft
Age limit for men drafted
Chauffeur grades created
Chauffeur pay and rank
Sec. 4 – Organization of Tactical Units
Headquarters and detachment units
Sec. 5 – General Officers Appointed for Staff and Other Duties
Temporary appointments for created vacancies
Sec. 6 – Rating of Aviators and Aeronauts
Certificates of qualifications
Examinations
Ratings for service requirements
Exceptions in war time
Aeronauts rank increase
Flight duty financial compensation
Sec. 7 – Ratings of Enlisted Mechanicians
Balloon mechanicians compensation
Sec. 8 – U.S. Army Comprehensive Compensation
U.S. Army troop strength levels
Sec. 9 – Emergency Authority for Airships and Aerial Machines
Buildings and motor vehicles
Aviation stations
Sites and buildings
Use of public lands
Improvements of sites
Buildings and structures
Water, lights, and plumbing
Roads and wharves
Subsistence equipments
Fuel supplies
Construction machinery and tools
Special clothing
Domestic and abroad travel expenses
Vocational training
Compensation for reserve officers and enlisted personnel called into service
Pay accounts
Development of airplanes and engines
Manufacturing plants maintenance
Schools for aviation technical instructions
New equipment exchanges
Foreign instructors travel compensation within the United States
Sec. 10 – Appropriation


== Associated United States Federal Statutes ==
United States legislation for the governance, service, and training of airships designed and developed for military operations.


== See also ==

Historic Airship Hangars in United States

Lighter-Than-Air Aircraft of United States


== Historical Bibliography ==
Baldwin, Thomas (1786). "Airopaidia: Narrative of a Balloon Excursion". Internet Archive. Chester, G.B.: J. Fletcher Publisher. OCLC 3759036.
Hearne, R.P.; Maxim, Sir Hiram Stevans (1910). "Airships in Peace & War". Internet Archive. John Lane Company. OCLC 68833818.
Talbot, Frederick A. (1915). "Aëroplanes and Dirigibles of War". Internet Archive. W. Heinemann. OCLC 41419082.
Talbot, Frederick A. (1915). "Aeroplanes and Dirigibles of War". Internet Archive. LibriVox.
Royal Flying Corps (1916). "Silhouettes of Aeroplanes and Airships". Internet Archive. Harrison & Sons. OCLC 506014009.
Orcy, Ladislas d' (1917). "D'Orcy's Airship Manual". Internet Archive. New York: The Century Co.
Navy Relief Society (1936). "Airships Souvenir Booklet Summer 1936". Internet Archive. George F. O'Connell Printing Company. OCLC 44071962.
Office of Air Force History (1978). "The U.S. Air Service in World War I: Volume I". Internet Archive. U.S. Air Force. OCLC 1975157.
Office of Air Force History (1978). "The U.S. Air Service in World War I: Volume II". Internet Archive. U.S. Air Force. OCLC 1975157.
Office of Air Force History (1978). "The U.S. Air Service in World War I: Volume III". Internet Archive. U.S. Air Force. OCLC 1975157.
Office of Air Force History (1978). "The U.S. Air Service in World War I: Volume IV". Internet Archive. U.S. Air Force. OCLC 1975157.


== Historical Video Archives ==


== External links ==
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. "Woodrow Wilson: "Address at The Chicago Auditorium in Chicago, Illinois," January 31, 1916". The American Presidency Project. University of California - Santa Barbara.
Peters, Gerhard; Woolley, John T. "Calvin Coolidge: "Address to the International Civil Aeronautics Conference in Washington, D.C.," December 12, 1928". The American Presidency Project. University of California - Santa Barbara.