The Alloway Township School District is a public school district that serves students in pre-kindergarten through eighth grade from Alloway Township in Salem County, in the U.S. state of New Jersey.
As of the 2022–23 school year, the district, comprised of one school, had an enrollment of 264 students and 27.0 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 9.8:1.
The district is classified by the New Jersey Department of Education as being in District Factor Group "DE", the fifth-highest of eight groupings. District Factor Groups organize districts statewide to allow comparison by common socioeconomic characteristics of the local districts. From lowest socioeconomic status to highest, the categories are A, B, CD, DE, FG, GH, I and J.
Students in public school for grades nine through twelve attend Woodstown High School in Woodstown, which serves students from Pilesgrove Township and Woodstown, along with students from Alloway Township, Oldmans Township and Upper Pittsgrove Township who attend the high school as part of sending/receiving relationships with the Woodstown-Pilesgrove Regional School District. As of the 2021–22 school year, the high school had an enrollment of 559 students and 49.7 classroom teachers (on an FTE basis), for a student–teacher ratio of 11.2:1.


== School ==
Alloway Township School serves students in grades PreK-8. The school had an enrollment of 286 students as of the 2021–22 school year.


== Administration ==
Core members of the district's administration are:

Constance McAllister, interim superintendent
Melanie Allen, business administrator and board secretary. Allen performs the same role with the Elsinboro Township School District and the Lower Alloways Creek Township School District as part of a shared services agreement.


== Board of education ==
The district's board of education, comprised of nine members, sets policy and oversees the fiscal and educational operation of the district through its administration. As a Type II school district, the board's trustees are elected directly by voters to serve three-year terms of office on a staggered basis, with three seats up for election each year held (since 2012) as part of the November general election. The board appoints a superintendent to oversee the district's day-to-day operations and a business administrator to supervise the business functions of the district.


== References ==


== External links ==
Alloway Township School District
School Performance Report for Alloway Township School, New Jersey Department of Education
Data for Alloway Township School District, National Center for Education Statistics
Woodstown High School