"Mechanix" is a song by the American thrash metal band Megadeth. It is the eighth and final track from their debut studio album, Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!, which released in 1985 under Combat Records. "Mechanix" has been featured on many Megadeth releases, including multiple greatest hits albums, as well as live albums. 
The song was performed live by frontman Dave Mustaine's first two bands, Panic and Metallica, and was included on many Metallica demo tapes, including Power Metal and No Life 'Til Leather. After kicking Mustaine out, Metallica reworked the song into "The Four Horsemen", which was featured on their debut album, Kill 'Em All (1983). Mustaine claims that the idea for the title "The Four Horsemen" came from his suggestion that Metallica play a cover of the Gamma song "Four Horsemen".


== Background and songwriting ==
"Mechanix" was originally written by Mustaine while he was in the band Panic. After the dissolution of Panic, Mustaine joined the band Metallica, bringing "Mechanix" with him. The song was recorded on their 1982 No Life 'Til Leather tape, which was the second demo the band released. After his departure from Metallica, the band added in more sections (also written by Mustaine) and re-wrote the lyrics, creating "The Four Horsemen". The version of "Mechanix" played by Metallica was the same speed as "The Four Horsemen", but once Mustaine was kicked out, he sped up the songs he wrote, including "Mechanix". He "wanted to be faster and heavier than them".
Lyrically, "Mechanix" is about having sex at a gas station and was inspired by Mustaine's time as a gas station attendant.


== Controversy ==
When Mustaine was kicked out of Metallica, he reportedly told the band to not use his songs. However, the band not only used solos and riffs, but some of Mustaine's entire songs, including "Mechanix". Metallica frontman James Hetfield wrote lyrics about the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, and added a bridge and  a slower "Sweet Home Alabama" inspired part with a guitar solo in the middle (Mustaine claims the authorship of the latter). The two songs have sparked debate between many metal fans over which one is better. In an interview after Megadeth's second show (which took place at The Stone in San Francisco), Mustaine talked about the set they played, and said "... and then (we) go into the Mechanix, off of the No Life 'Til Leather demo. Exactly that way. Not with this 'Four Horsemen' wimp shit".
There is some dispute regarding songwriting credits for the song. Metallica lists the song as a James Hetfield, Lars Ulrich and Mustaine composition on their official website, while Megadeth credits the song as solely by Mustaine. The dispute over songwriting royalties caused a planned reissue of No Life 'Til Leather to be canceled, according to Mustaine.


== Accolades ==


== Personnel ==
Production and performance credits are adapted from the liner notes of Killing Is My Business... and Business Is Good!.


== References ==