Southend Victoria railway station is the eastern terminus of the Shenfield to Southend Line, a branch off the Great Eastern Main Line, in the East of England. It is one of two primary stations that serve the resort city of Southend-on-Sea, Essex; the other is Southend Central  on the London, Tilbury and Southend line. It is located 41 miles 42 chains (66.83 km) down the line from London Liverpool Street; the preceding station on the line is Prittlewell. The Engineer's Line Reference for the line is SSV; the station's three-letter station code is SOV. The station has four platforms, each with an operational length for 10-car Class 720 electric multiple units.


== History ==
The line from Wickford to Southend, including this station, was opened on 1 October 1889. There was a goods yard to the east of the station, which closed on 5 June 1967. The station area still has extensive carriage sidings: Down Carriage Sidings (North) 10 roads (known as the Klondyke sidings); Down Carriage Sidings (South) three roads plus a disused Royal Mail Terminal; Up Carriage Sidings (North) three roads (known as The Shute); Up Carriage Sidings (South) two roads.
Electrification of the Shenfield to Southend Victoria line using 1.5 kV DC overhead line electrification (OLE) was completed on 31 December 1956. This was changed to 6.25 kV AC in November 1960 and to 25 kV AC on 25 January 1979.
The station was named Southend for Westcliffe & Thorpe Bay from 1933 to 1949; it was renamed Southend-on-Sea Victoria on 1 May 1949 and was finally changed to Southend Victoria on 20 February 1969.


== Service ==

The station is managed by Greater Anglia, which also operates all trains serving it. The typical Monday to Saturday off-peak service is of three trains per hour to Liverpool Street. On Sundays, there are typically two trains per hour to Liverpool Street. Services join the Great Eastern Main Line for London at the line's western terminus at Shenfield.
The city's other main station is Southend Central, which provides services westbound to London Fenchurch Street and eastbound to Shoeburyness, operated by c2c.


== References ==


== External links ==

Train times and station information for Southend Victoria railway station from National Rail