The Cebuano people (Cebuano: Mga Sugbuanon) are the largest subgroup of the  larger ethnolinguistic group Visayans, who constitute the largest Filipino ethnolinguistic group in the country. They originated in the province of Cebu in the region of Central Visayas, but then later spread out to other places in the Philippines, such as Siquijor, Bohol, Negros Oriental, southwestern Leyte, western Samar, Masbate, and large parts of Mindanao. It may also refer to the ethnic group who speak the same language as their native tongue in different parts of the archipelago. The term Cebuano also refers to the demonym of permanent residents in Cebu island regardless of ethnicity.


== History ==

The earliest European record of Cebuanos was by Antonio Pigafetta of the Magellan expedition. He provided some descriptions of their customs as well as samples of the Cebuano language. Ferdinand Magellan was killed in Cebu during the Battle of Mactan against the forces of Lapulapu.
Later early Spanish colonists referred to the Cebuanos (and other Visayans) as the pintados ("the painted ones"), due to their widespread practice of tattooing to record battle exploits.


== Culture and festivities ==

The majority of Cebuanos are Roman Catholic, with many in rural areas synchronizing Catholicism with indigenous Bisayan folk religion. A minority of Cebuanos (specifically those in Mindanao) are Muslim (due to their contact with the Moro people), or in mixed Chinese-Cebuano families, incorporate Catholic beliefs with aspects of Buddhism or Taoism. A recent genetic study found 10-20% of Cebuano ancestry is attributable to South Asian (Indian) descent, dated to a time when Precolonial Cebu practiced Hinduism. Meanwhile, according to Spanish era tribute-censuses, Spanish-Filipinos compose 2.17% of the Cebuano people's recorded population.: 113 
Among the island's notable festivities are the Sinulog festival, which is a mixture of Christian and native cultural elements, celebrated annually every third week of January.


== Language ==

The Cebuano language is spoken by more than twenty million people in the Philippines and is the most widely spoken of the Visayan languages. Most speakers of Cebuano are found in Cebu, Bohol, Siquijor, southeastern Masbate, Biliran, Western and Southern Leyte, eastern Negros and most of Mindanao except Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. Like with other Filipino ethnolinguistic groups, Tagalog (Filipino) and English are also spoken by Cebuanos as second languages.
Despite being one of the largest ethnic groups, Cebuanos outside their homeland tend to fluently learn the languages native in areas where they settled and assimilated, along with their native language. Hiligaynon is spoken and understood by the Cebuanos living in Negros Occidental and Soccsksargen. They often speak a mixture of Cebuano and Hiligaynon in Sagay and neighboring municipalities of Negros Occidental facing Iloilo and Cebu and municipalities bordering Negros Oriental, Bukidnon and Davao del Sur. Cebuano residents in Zamboanga City and Caraga Region are fluent in Zamboanga Chavacano, Butuanon and Surigaonon respectively, with the two latter are related to Cebuano. They have also varying fluencies in various Lumad languages, the Danao languages, Tausug (linguistically related to Cebuano), Yakan, and Sama, in which these languages are native to the areas where Cebuanos also inhabit, coexist with and even assimilated to the natives, and to the lesser extent, Ilocano (a language originated in Ilocandia), which is also spoken in Soccsksargen and various parts of Bukidnon, Misamis Oriental, Caraga, Zamboanga Sibugay and Davao Region. Cebuanos in Masbate and Eastern Visayas can also speak Masbateño, one of the Bicol languages and Waray in Masbate, Samar and eastern parts of Leyte.


== See also ==
Demographics of the Philippines
Ethnic groups in the Philippines
Cebu
Cebuano language
Rajahnate of Cebu
Tagalog people
Kapampangan people
Ilocano people
Ivatan people
Igorot people
Pangasinan people
Bicolano people
Negrito
Visayan people
Aklanon people
Boholano people
Capiznon people
Cuyunon people
Eskaya people
Hiligaynon people
Karay-a people
Masbateño people
Porohanon people
Romblomanon people
Suludnon
Waray people
Lumad
Moro people


== References ==