Ichiban Kasuga (Japanese: 春日 一番, Hepburn: Kasuga Ichiban), also nicknamed Ichi (一), is a character from Sega's Ryu ga Gotoku media franchise, formerly known internationally as Yakuza. Ichiban is first introduced in the 2018 mobile game Ryu ga Gotoku ONLINE, a freemium collectible card game spin-off which is exclusively released in Japan. Ichiban is the lead character in the 2020 video game Yakuza: Like A Dragon, the first main series Yakuza title which does not feature recurring series lead Kazuma Kiryu as a playable character. Ichiban is voiced by Kazuhiro Nakaya in Japanese, and by Kaiji Tang in English.
Within the series, Ichiban is originally a low-ranking member of the Arakawa Family, a subsidiary yakuza family of the Kanto-based Tojo Clan. He willingly goes to prison for a murder that he did not commit at the turn of the 21st century, having acquiesced to the request of his clan patriarch, Masumi Arakawa. Upon his release 18 years later, Ichiban discovers that Arakawa has apparently betrayed the rest of the Tojo Clan to the Omi Alliance, a rival yakuza organization based in Osaka, and finds himself stranded in the city of Yokohama after he is shot by Arakawa following an attempted confrontation. A destitute Ichiban starts a new life and forges new connections in an unfamiliar city, where he is eventually thrust into a conspiracy involving a money laundering scheme which involves Japan's political establishment.
Ichiban was designed by franchise developers Ryu Ga Gotoku Studio for Ryu ga Gotoku ONLINE, though a decision was later made by executive director and franchise creator Toshihiro Nagoshi and his team to position Ichiban as the lead character of future mainline entry games. Despite sharing certain traits in their backstories, both characters have little in common with each other in terms of personality, as Ichiban is written to be more emotive and outspoken in temperament.
The character has received a generally positive response from critics and players in the video game community, with the consensus that he is a suitable choice to succeed Kiryu's role as the lead character in future games.


== Concept and design ==
The end of development for Yakuza 6: The Song of Life, which brought Kazuma Kiryu's story arc to a close, coincided with the commencement of development for the 2018 mobile title  Ryu ga Gotoku ONLINE. The Yakuza franchise's developers, Ryu Ga Gotoku Studio, wanted to create a new lead character to continue the narrative of the fictional universe they have created. Chief producer and writer Masayoshi Yokoyama noted that their goal after Yakuza 6 was not to "create the next Yakuza title" but to "create the next protagonist."  Realizing that this new protagonist could serve as the franchise's "catalyst for change" by moving away from the exploration of a modern version of a typical Japanese hero in Kiryu, Yokoyama set about creating and portraying a "life-sized hero", a protagonist who is essentially a "normal guy" who is not as strong or mature as Kiryu.
To differentiate him from Kiryu, Ichiban is written to be less stoic and more emotive in comparison. Yokoyama positioned Ichiban's personality as the opposite of Kiryu's in many ways: "thoroughly uncomplicated, direct, cheerful, reckless". Toshihiro Nagoshi approved of the decision to change the franchise's lead character from Kiryu to Ichiban. Commenting on the transition of genres between an action-adventure game to a turn-based role-playing game for Like A Dragon, he said the change occurs because of the different objective, which itself had changed because of Ichiban's different personality to Kiryu's since they speak, think and act differently. Consequently, a storyline starring Ichiban would naturally include more comedic or goofy scenes due to the character's nature.
Ichiban is an orphan raised in Kamurochō by Jiro Kasuga, the manager of a soapland, a type of prostitution establishment that provides its services based on the exploitation of a loophole in Japanese law. His background of being born and raised in one of Japan's "grey zones" was set from the start. As a major story theme in Like A Dragon concerns the struggles of individuals who are not clearly defined by moral absolutes, this allowed the game's writers to position Ichiban from a perspective that humanizes such individuals as common everyday people. Yokoyama does not believe in portraying unconditional good and evil, as he believes that  people with criminal records are capable of righteousness, while members of society who are respected by the public are capable of evil. To Yokoyama, Ichiban's comical "fool" deliberately contrasts the dark setting of Like A Dragon, and that his most important role in the game is to overturning "worldly prejudices" and fight against "invisible discrimination". The character's fascination with Dragon Quest serves as the impetus for the series' change from action adventure to role-playing games.


=== Casting ===

Auditions of the character started early in development to appreciate him sooner. Kazuhiro Nakaya, who previously voiced recurring franchise character Akira Nishikiyama, was one of the candidates who read for the role. Yokoyama said that Nakaya's reading of the character's scripted lines projected a rebellious personality which stood out to the developers. After a discussion between Yokoyama and Nagoshi, Nakaya was chosen for the role. Nakaya interpreted Ichiban as an energetic and vivid character when reading the script. Following the worldwide release of Like A Dragon by late 2020, Nakaya indicated in an interview with Famitsu that Ichiban will lead the series for the foreseeable future, and that he was grateful for the support from Takaya Kuroda, Kiryu's voice actor, with regards to the transition.
Ichiban's English voice actor, Kaiji Tang, describes him as a "whimsical" character who, despite being the game's protagonist, also serves the role of a supporting character due to how he often assists his allies. Tang said that his character is the "opposite" of Kiryu in terms of personality. He believes that Ichiban fits the Yakuza setting due to his love for Dragon Quest, as well as his heroic demeanor which goes along the new type of gameplay Like a Dragon provided to the franchise. During recording of the game, Tang befriended Greg Chun, who voices supporting character Nanba. Tang and has cited Chun's work as an inspiration. Tang notes that he was able to draw upon his life experiences as an Asian man to help with his performance as Ichiban. For example, in a pivotal scene where Ichiban's mentor promises to take him to try Peking duck, he helped the rest of the cast understand what the dish was by ordering some for them to eat.


== Appearances ==


=== Yakuza: Like A Dragon ===
In 2001, yakuza Ichiban Kasuga agrees to go to prison for a murder that he did not commit to repay Arakawa Family patriarch Masumi Arakawa for saving his life in his youth. 18 years later, Ichiban is released from prison. He meets ex-detective Koichi Adachi, who explains that while Ichiban was in jail, Arakawa defected to the Osaka-based Omi Alliance and betrayed the Tojo Clan to the Tokyo Metropolitan Police. Arakawa's son Masato, whom he used to serve as his personal attendant, had apparently died due to illness, the tragedy of which supposedly fuels Arakawa's ruthlessness behind his rise to power. Ichiban is shot by Arakawa when he attempts to confront him.
Ichiban is nursed back to health by Nanba, a local homeless man and disbarred nurse. Ichiban starts accepting work from an employment agency to earn a living, and later investigate the Liumang with his friends to learn the truth behind the murder of one of their employers, a soapland proprietor named Nonomiya. Ichiban's investigation embroils him in a conspiracy involving a massive counterfeiting ring being run by the Ijin Three at the behest of a powerful Japanese politician, Yutaka Ogikubo. He also discovers that the anti-crime activist group Bleach Japan is indirectly responsible for Nonomiya's death. After sighting a picture of Ryo Aoki, the upstart Governor of Tokyo and co-founder of Bleach Japan, Ichiban recognizes him as an actual living Masato Arakawa.
Ichiban learns from Seiryu Clan chairman Ryuhei Hoshino that the counterfeit bill is proof that Arakawa shot him in a non-lethal manner to create a false impression of his demise. Ichiban and the Ijin Three leaders resolve to field a candidate they would endorse to compete with Bleach Japan loyalist Souta Kume's candidacy for the upcoming regional representative election. During their preparations, Ichiban hears of an important Omi Alliance meeting in Osaka that Arakawa will attend. He infiltrates the meeting and finds Arakawa with several Tojo Clan figures. Ichiban learns that Arakawa is a double agent, and that once the Omi chairman, Masaru Watase, is released from prison, he will make a joint announcement with Dojima to disband their respective clans. After facing the Omi, Ichiban reconciles with Arakawa, but is shocked next day to learn of his death. To draw out Aoki in order to confront him, Ichiban decides to enter himself as an electoral candidate with Hoshino's support, but Aoki's henchman Jo Sawashiro assassinates Hoshino. Following his defeat, Sawashiro informs Ichiban that Arakawa's son was switched for his own son as an infant, and implies that Arakawa may have been Ichiban's birth father all along.
Ichiban confronts Aoki during an election rally and tricks him into sending his men to the Millenium Tower at Kamurochō after lying about Sawashiro leaking the existence of incriminating evidence at the Arakawa Family office. Ichiban arranges for Aoki to be lured to the Arakawa Family office, and used the opportunity to record incriminating evidence against him and expose his true nature to the general public. Ichiban trails a fleeing Aoki and pleads with him to give himself up. Aoki is about to come around but is fatally stabbed by a disillusioned Kume. Following the funeral service for Arakawa and Aoki, Ichiban decides to remain in Ijincho to stay with his friends.


=== Like a Dragon: Infinite Wealth ===


=== Other appearances ===
Ichiban first appears in the 2018 Ryu ga Gotoku ONLINE, which presents an alternate version of his character arc following his release from prison. Unlike in Like A Dragon, this incarnation of Ichiban never leaves Kamurochō, and encounters a different cast of supporting characters as well as enemies. Ichiban appears as an unlockable player character of the promotional freeware game Streets of Kamurocho, developed and released as part of Sega's 60th anniversary celebrations in October 2020.


== Promotion and reception ==
Ichiban Kasuga was first publicly revealed in August 2017 as part of the developer's promotional efforts for the then-upcoming Ryu ga Gotoku ONLINE. Ichiban was featured prominently in the marketing campaign for Like A Dragon, such as the game's cover art, promotional trailers, and social media videos. A 2019 gameplay trailer featuring Ichiban and his party engaging enemies in a turn-based RPG battle system was initially interpreted as an April Fools' Day joke due to its gameplay mechanics which was considered unusual for the series, as well as the timing of its release date and its proximity to the 1st of April. A line of Yakuza franchise merchandise developed by apparel company SuperGroupie was launched in June 2021,  including watches, bags, jackets, and shoes, all of which will have details inspired by Ichiban's appearances in the games. A cologne label titled "Ichiban Kasuga Eau de Toilette", which was developed as a collaboration with fragrance company Fits Corporation, was unveiled during the franchise's 15th anniversary live stream by Sega.
Ichiban was generally well received by critics in their preview commentary of Like a Dragon. GameSpot compared him to Goro Majima based on similar traits they share "though a lot less deranged", while also noting that he is quite different from Kiryu despite sharing other traits in their backstories. GamesRadar enjoyed the game mechanics presented towards Ichiban and his allies, making their wait for the game's release worthwhile. Eurogamer describes him as a kind character due to how Ichiban aims to become a hero regardless of not being as intelligent as other Yakuza main characters.
Ichiban has received a very positive response from the video game community following the release of Like a Dragon. Michael Higham from GameSpot praised Ichiban as an endearing lead character who is immediately loveable and helps gives the franchise "a fresh start". Jorge Jimenez from PC Gamer praised Ichiban's optimistic characterization, a "goofy, happy go lucky gangster who loves classic JRPGs", as an effective way of explaining the franchise's drastic genre shift with Like a Dragon. Leah Williams and Tegan Jones from Kotaku Australia welcomed the decision to have Ichiban succeed Kiryu as the new lead character of the franchise, lauding his character arc to be simultaneously moving as well as one filled with ridiculous fun. They believe that Ichiban is a good example of how slapstick humour can be blended seamlessly with high octane action to create an excellent, engaging story. Chris Moyse from Destructoid praised Ichiban's character arc for "masterfully blending stoicism, bravery, pathos, heroism, and just the right amount of complete and utter idiocy to immediately win the hearts of the Yakuza faithful". German publication GamePro lauded Ichiban for his big heart and highly emotive nature, qualities which they feel a lot of protagonist characters lack. On the other hand, Dia Lacina from Paste Magazine expressed mixed feelings over Ichiban's portrayal: while Lacina liked that Ichiban is more imminently relatable and achievable as a hero archetype, she criticized the naive speech Ichiban gives to defend Nonomiya's reprehensible behaviour based on his own experience of having grown up under the care of a brothel manager as unconvincing and somewhat insulting.
Several publications rated Ichiban as among the best video game characters featured in 2020, a year where Like A Dragon saw an international release. Giovanni Colantonio from Inverse considered Ichiban to be the best playable protagonist of 2020 because he is allowed to be a naive and flawed character who makes plenty of mistakes, a trait rarely seen in most video game heroes, which led to the best character development of any other character in the industry in his view. Hayes Madsen from Screen Rant  said Ichiban is the most important protagonist in games for the year 2020, and called him an inspiring character due to his unfailing kindness and warmth of humanity, and that his story arc in Like a Dragon put forward meaningful commentary on the inequalities of society.  Chingy Nea from Kotaku praised Ichiban as the Yakuza series' most relatable protagonist and one of its best characters, and the main reason why Like a Dragon was a source of comfort and joy for her in late-2020. Game Informer ranked Ichiban third place on the publication's list of the top 10 characters of 2020, with Joe Juba commenting that Ichiban's characterization balances the story's tension "with an infectious desire to help the people society overlooks". Naming Ichiban one of the best new characters of 2020, Destructoid staff observed that Ichiban managed to fill the void left by Kiryu "with relative ease", and that his immediate popularity with the video game community successfully secures the Yakuza franchise's future in their view.
The performances of both Kazuhiro Nakaya and Kaiji Tang as the Japanese and English voices of Ichiban were also praised by Polygon and Atomix. Anime News Network in particular enjoyed Tang's performance as "absolutely spot-on" due to the multiple expressions he gives to his character. RPGFan also regarded Tang as one of the best actors in the entire game based on the impact of his deliveries.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Stewart, Marcus (May 30, 2022). "I Wish Kingdom Hearts' Sora Was More Like Yakuza's Ichiban Kasuga". Game Informer. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022.