Syed Asim Munir Ahmed Shah NI(M) HI(M) (born 1968) is a Pakistani military officer who is currently serving as the 11th chief of the army staff of Pakistan Army since 29 November 2022. Before becoming the army chief, he was posted at the GHQ as Quartermaster general.
He commanded the XXX Corps in Gujranwala from 17 June 2019 to 6 October 2021. He served as the 28th Director-General of the ISI until he was replaced by lieutenant general Faiz Hameed on 16 June 2019. Munir received the Sword of Honour for his performance as a cadet in the Officers Training School (OTS), Mangla.


== Early life and education ==
Munir was born in Rawalpindi, Punjab, Pakistan to a Punjabi family, with their roots lying in Jalandhar, Punjab, India, from where his parents migrated following the 1947 partition of India. They moved to Toba Tek Singh before settling down in Rawalpindi's Dheri Hassanabad. His father, Syed Sarwar Munir, was the principal of the FG Technical High School, Lalkurti, Rawalpindi and the imam of a mosque, Masjid-al-Quraish, situated in a locality of Dheri Hassanabad, where he often delivered the Friday Khutbah sermon. Munir has two siblings, Syed Qasim Munir and Syed Hashim Munir. One of his brothers is a government school teacher.
Munir got his early religious education in a traditional Islamic seminary in Rawalpindi, the Markazi Madrasah Dar-ul-Tajweed, in his youth also being a local cricketer as a fast bowler.
Later, Munir graduated from the Fuji school, Japan, the Command and Staff College, Quetta, the Malaysian Armed Forces College, Kuala Lumpur and the National Defence University, Islamabad, where he earned his MPhil in Public Policy and Strategic Security Management.


== Military service ==
Munir is from the 17th course of the Officers Training School (OTS) in Mangla. He was commissioned in the 23rd Battalion of the Frontier Force Regiment. He started his military career on 25 April 1986.
As a lieutenant colonel, Munir served in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia as part of the close defence cooperation between Riyadh and Islamabad, and also served in the Siachen Glacier.
While he was a brigadier, he served as the chief of staff of Pakistan's I Strike Corps Mangla, and commanded an infantry brigade in the Northern Areas. He was promoted to the rank of Major general in 2014 and served as the commander of the troops deployed in the Northern Areas of Pakistan. 
Munir also served as the director-general of Military Intelligence in 2016. He was awarded the Hilal-i-Imtiaz in March 2018. Munir was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general in September 2018 and was subsequently appointed as DG ISI. In June 2019, Munir was replaced by Lt. Gen. Faiz Hameed as the new DG ISI. Subsequently, Munir was appointed as corps commander of XXX Corps in Gujranwala in 2019. From 2021 to November 2022, Lt-General Munir was posted at GHQ as the Quartermaster General of Pakistan Army. In November 2022, Lieutenant General Munir was promoted to the four-star general rank and appointed as the Chief of the Army Staff of the Pakistan Army.
At the time of his appointment as COAS, Munir was the most senior lieutenant general of the Pakistani army. In December 2022, General Munir received the Nishan-i-Imtiaz (Military) award from President Arif Alvi. At the Aiwan-e-Sadr, top military officials were given special investitures in front of Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif, diplomats, lawmakers, and federal ministers were present during the ceremony.
Munir is the third recipient of Sword of Honour who has risen to the position of army chief in the military history of Pakistan, after Asif Nawaz Janjua and Jehangir Karamat. Additionally, he is the only army chief in the history of Pakistan who has earlier served as chief of both premier military intelligence agencies of Pakistan, namely, Inter-Services Intelligence and Military Intelligence.


== Director-General of the ISI (2018–2019) ==
Munir was appointed the DG-ISI on 25 October 2018, under the tenure of Imran Khan. He oversaw the 2019 skirmish with India, relaying critical information between the two countries, and holding an important role. Pakistan's retaliation against India was triggered by the Munir-led committee who strongly advised Pakistan's civil-military leadership to respond to the Indian threat. 
Munir's tenure as DG-ISI is the shortest in the country's history. It is alleged Munir was removed by Qamar Javed Bajwa under pressure from Imran Khan when Munir claimed to have exposed the corruption of Khan's wife, Bushra Bibi. 
However, Khan called this allegation "completely false", further explaining in a post on X that "this is completely false. Neither did Gen Asim show me any proof of my wife's corruption nor did I make him resign because of that."


== Chief of Army Staff (2022–present) ==
Munir was scheduled to retire on 27 November 2022. Before his appointment as Chief of Army Staff (COAS), he submitted his retirement application which was subsequently rejected by the Ministry of Defense , he was informed that the government had decided to retain him in service. Following consultations between Shehbaz Sharif and his brother, former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, Munir was appointed the new COAS on 24 November 2022, just three days before his planned retirement. The recommendation for Munir's appointment as COAS was forwarded by the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, Shehbaz Sharif, to the then President Arif Alvi on 24 November 2022. Alvi approved it on the same day, officially extending Munir's service for a term of three years. Munir assumed the role of COAS on 29 November 2022, two days after his initially scheduled retirement. Munir's selection as COAS was from a pool of six eligible candidates. His appointment was widely perceived as strategic. 


=== Handling of political crisis ===
In May 2023, Imran Khan was arrested, when he was released on bail, Asim Munir found himself under direct criticism from Imran Khan, with Khan accusing him of "dismantling the future of this country [Pakistan] to protect himself." Following the arrest of Imran Khan, reports emerged indicating a division within the Pakistan Army.
Khan's arrest resulted in the May 9 riots, where military installations were attacked, looted, and ransacked. Munir visited the places where rioting had occurred, and vowed that such an event would never reoccur. Munir's reaction lead to the attempt of trying civilians under military courts, which received criticism from international observers as military courts are not seen as impartial and fair.


=== Handling of economic crisis ===
Munir has been adamant on solving the economic crisis in Pakistan by setting up the Special Investment Facilitation Council, intending to bring in billions of dollars of investment from abroad, especially Pakistan's gulf allies. The economic crisis, led to the Pakistani rupee devaluing to its weakest in its history, valuing at 308 per dollar. As a measure to strengthen the rupee, he initiated crackdowns on the black market, which had been selling dollars illegally, which was harming the rupee. These crackdowns were successful, and the Pakistani rupee had rebounded to become the world’s best-performing currency in September 2023.


=== Visit to the United States ===

Munir visited the United States in December 2023, being hosted by the US Secretary of Defense, Lloyd Austin, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Charles Q. Brown, and US Deputy National Security Adviser, Jonathan Finer. Munir reemphasised ties with the United States, which were under strain during former prime minister Imran Khan's premiership. The US reaffirmed Pakistan as an "ally" and expressed support for its commitments to regional security and defence cooperation.


== Personal life ==
Munir is a Muslim, and he is deemed as a conservative figure regarding religion. Despite his affinity to Islam, he has stressed the need for combating against Islamic extremism, providing a safe nation for Pakistan's religious minorities.
Munir's family are locally known as a hafiz family, as its many members are known to have memorised the entire Qu'ran by heart, including Munir, who did so during his posting in Saudi Arabia as a Lieutenant-Colonel.
Munir is a fitness enthusiast, sportsman, and a runner. He's also considered to be an avid reader and a traveller.


== Views ==


=== Foreign policy ===
Munir's foreign policy, or "the Munir doctrine", has been described as trying to shift away from the traditional choice between the United States and China as a primary geopolitical partner, and centred around three key points: to have a softer image of Pakistan, to transform it into a regional middle power, especially as a security actor, and to prioritize geoeconomics over geopolitics.
He has been critical of Pakistan's neighbours, arguing that Afghanistan did not support Pakistan's admission to the United Nations following independence and has historically supported the insurgency in Balochistan. Regarding India, he stated that "India has not reconciled with the concept of Pakistan, then how can we reconcile with them?"


=== "Pakistan first" policy ===
Munir is described as having a "Pakistan first" policy, taking a defensive stance against many of Pakistan's adversaries. After the 2024 Iran–Pakistan border skirmishes, Munir reiterated that Pakistan would respond to such altercations, stating that "You [Iran] cannot backstab us, and if you do, you will get a befitting reply."
Munir is also regarded as carrying a heavy anti-Afghan attitude, supporting the deportation of 1.7 million illegal Afghan refugees. 
He has also stated that Pakistan should be prioritised over Afghanistan, even stating that "when it comes to the safety and security of every single Pakistani, the whole of Afghanistan can be damned."


=== Social conservatism ===
While speaking to a gathering of students from various public and private sector universities of the country, Munir appeared as a social conservative, warning the youth against social media and Westernization, eventually asking that "If we want to adopt Western civilization, then why did we get rid of Hindu civilization?".


=== Freedom of expression ===
In May 2024, Munir expressed concerns regarding "negative propaganda" on social media platforms and affirmed the military's readiness to address any threats or conspiracies. He also strongly denounced the dissemination of "disinformation" in Pakistan's cyberspace. Munir emphasized that the military understands its constitutional boundaries, and he urged others to also abide by the limits outlined in the constitution. He pointed to Article 19 of the Constitution of Pakistan, which delineates restrictions on freedom of expression, including the prohibition of incitement to violence and attempts to undermine the integrity, security, or defense of Pakistan, among other provisions. 
In November 2024, a statement from state broadcaster PTV recorded Munir as saying “Unrestricted freedom of speech is leading to the degradation of moral values in all societies.” He further said "[w]hile technology has enhanced access to knowledge, it has also facilitated the rapid spread of misinformation and hateful narratives, destabilizing political and social structures globally".


=== Social media ===
In April 2024, Munir warned that negative propaganda and social media trolls would not be able to deter them. In May 2024, he cautioned that "inimical" forces and their supporters had unleashed "digital terrorism" and were intensifying efforts to sow discord between the Pakistan Armed Forces and the public by spreading "lies, fake news, and propaganda."
In August 2024, Munir warned that social media was being exploited to propagate "anarchy." His remarks that "Anarchy is spread through social media" followed a condemnation by the ISPR of social media campaigns to target the Pakistan Armed Forces. He also issued a warning against efforts to incite chaos within the country. The Tribune (India) highlighted that his comments followed social media posts drawing parallels between Pakistan's current situation and the downfall of Sheikh Hasina's government in Bangladesh.
On August 14, while addressing a parade on country's Independence Day, Munir reiterated his criticism of social media, warning that it was being used to spread chaos and false information targeting the Pakistan Armed Forces. He also attributed this "digital terrorism" to foreign elements. 
On 21 August, Munir stated that it is the state's duty to shield the public from the adverse effects of social media-driven "hysteria" and "fitna." DAWN reported that this statement was part of a series of warnings from Munir and the Pakistani military concerning the potential "dangers" with social media.


== Public image ==


=== Appraisals ===
Munir has been a polarising figure. He is applauded by some individuals for cracking down on dollar hoarding and smuggling, which strengthened the Pakistani rupee, causing it to be the world's top-performing currency of September 2023. Additionally, he contributed to the set up of the Special Investment Facilitation Council, which aims to bring billions of dollars of investment from overseas, especially from the Gulf states, that are desperately needed amidst the economic crisis.


=== Criticism ===
However, Munir is accused of intervening in civil politics, despite only being trusted with the nation's security and defence.  Munir has also allegedly suppressed the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf political party led by Imran Khan. In the aftermath of May 9 riots, following the arrest of Imran Khan on corruption allegations, Munir used military courts for civilians who rebelled against the army.
On May 20, 2023, Munir announced that the "legal process of trial against planners, instigators, abettors and perpetrators involved in the May 9 tragedy has commenced under Pakistan Army Act and Official Secret Act". Furthermore, Munir exhorted army professionals to root out PTI inclined individuals. Human rights organizations raised the concerns that military trials lack the necessary safeguards and transparency, thereby exposing to the risk of potential miscarriages of justice. In a landmark judgement, the Supreme Court of Pakistan declared the trial of civilians in military courts as null and void, thereby drawing a legal line between the civilian and military domain.
In addition, he has also been criticised for the deportation of illegal Afghan refugees, which he condones, despite their tough conditions.
In June 2024, American Congressman Ro Khanna condemned the targeting of family members of pro-democracy American activists in Pakistan by military personnel and called for sanctions against Pakistani military leaders, including Munir.


=== Reputation ===
On his appointment as COAS, Al-Jazeera described Munir as an officer with an "impeccable reputation", while The Times of India described him as a "tough guy" for his hawkish attitude.


== Controversies ==


=== Allegations by Zalmay Khalilzad ===
On 19 May 2023, Zalmay Khalilzad alleged on Twitter that during his visit to the Sialkot Cantonment, where several military installations were targeted in the May 9 riots, Munir issued threats against senior officers. Khalilzad claimed that Munir warned the families of those who participated in the riots, stating that if he "goes down he will take others down with him". 
Subsequently, Khalilzad faced criticism from Pakistani government and various politicians who labeled his remarks as controversial and false. Various people, including senators and defence analysts, challenged him on his claims, and asked him for evidence. The United States Department of State then clarified that Khalilzad did not represent American foreign policy.


=== Allegations by Imran Khan ===
On 7 April 2024, Imran Khan, speaking to reporters while incarcerated, claimed that there was a conspiracy to assassinate him during his imprisonment and implied that "his fate was in the hands of Gen. Asim Munir". He stated "Let it be known that if anything happens to me or my wife, it'll be him who will be responsible." Khan alleged that his wife, Bushra Bibi had been poisoned during her incarceration in early 2024, however, according to her personal physician, no evidence of poisoning was found during medical checkup. 
Khan also alleged that a "London plan" had been devised between Munir and Nawaz Sharif, aimed at sidelining the PTI and resolving the legal cases against Sharif. On 17 April, Imran Khan blamed Munir for the incarceration of his wife, and said, "If anything happens to her, I will not leave Asim Munir, I will not leave Asim Munir as long as I am alive. I will expose his unconstitutional and illegal steps." Bibi was found guilty in a corruption trial and also for unlawfully marrying Khan, each by separate courts. Instead of serving her sentence in Adiala Jail, she was permitted to serve it at her residence in Bani Gala, Islamabad.
On 2 May, Khan conveyed through an article for The Daily Telegraph, that while incarcerated, the military establishment, led directly by Munir, employed various tactics to diminish his party's influence within Pakistan's political landscape. He stated that "the military establishment has done all they could against me. All that is left for them is to now murder me."
In June 2024, Khan accused Munir of violating an agreement to stay politically neutral in Pakistani politics and claimed that Munir's appointment as army chief was contingent on this neutrality, which then President of Pakistan, Arif Alvi could have blocked but didn't after Munir's promise. Khan also alleged a conspiracy between Munir and Nawaz Sharif, suggesting they cooperated against him in exchange for dropping corruption charges against Sharif, which led to Sharif's exile.
Khan also accused Munir of ordering Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agents to assassinate him and covering up these attempts by suppressing a police investigation and burying CCTV footage from a court appearance in March 2023 during a violent confrontation between his supporters and authorities. Khan also criticized Munir for allegedly obstructing an independent investigation into the attempted assassination in November 2022.


=== Allegation of interference in judiciary ===
In his 2020 book, The Battle for Pakistan, Shuja Nawaz stated that Munir "was reported to have been behind the sacking of a high court judge who had been critical of the ISI." However, Shaukat Aziz Siddiqui clarified that his removal occurred before Munir's appointment as ISI head and attributed his sacking to former Chief Justices Saqib Nisar and Asif Saeed Khosa, and then-DG-C ISI Major General Faiz Hameed. Siddiqui stated that Shuja Nawaz's account was incorrect and emphasized that Munir was not involved in his dismissal.


== Dates of promotion ==


== Awards and decorations ==

Other awards he won  are:

Sword of Honor


=== Foreign decorations ===


== Notes ==


== References ==