The Overtake Award is presented annually by cryptocurrency platform and Formula One global sponsor Crypto.com, "to celebrate the bravery exhibited by drivers who make bold moves in pursuit of success", and "to celebrate drivers' instincts to make bold and strategic moves". It was first awarded in 2021 by Crypto.com, the trophy's official sponsor, to the individual driver who made the most overtakes during the season. The award was modified for the 2022 season: instead of counting the number of overtakes, fans voted for the best overtake of each Grand Prix via social media. At the end of the season there was a social media poll to determine the overall winner. For the 2023 and 2024 seasons, the award was modified so that fans may select their favourite overtake from a shortlist of the best on-track action every month of the season. At the end of the season, all winners are voted to decide the definitive on-track move of the season.
According to the award rules, an overtake occurs when two racers on the same lap traverse a timing loop on a race track in a different order than when they passed through the previous one. The pass must happen on the track rather than in the pit lane. The pit lane section's length is determined by the safety car's entry and exit lines. First lap overtakes are counted and the driver's starting position serves as the race's first timing loop. A pass that the stewards deemed illegal and resulted in a sporting penalty for that racer is still counted. If a driver is disqualified from a Grand Prix, any passes they made are counted. No overtakes are recognised if the pursued driver retires or is slower than usual owing to an error when not in a duel, or if they are affected by a mechanical problem. Any position changes that occur behind the safety car or during a race stoppage are likewise not counted.


== Overtake Award 2021 ==

In the inaugural Crypto.com Overtake Award, Sebastian Vettel won the award for making the most overtakes of any driver during the 2021 season. The eight drivers who performed the most overtakes throughout the season were:


== Overtake King 2022 ==
In 2022, the award was awarded after every race. At the end of the season, Sebastian Vettel's overtake against Kevin Magnussen was voted as the favourite on-track move of the season, meaning that Vettel won the award for the second year in a row.


== Overtake of the Month 2023 ==
In 2023, the fans selected from a shortlist of the best on-track action every month of the season. At the end of the season, all monthly winners went up against each other. Charles Leclerc's overtake against Sergio Pérez was awarded as the Overtake of the Year.


== Overtake of the Month 2024 ==
Similar to the 2023 season, in the 2024 season, the fans vote from a shortlist of the best on-track action every month. The winning driver is presented with the award at the following Formula One event in the fan forum.


== Notes ==


== References ==