The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) is an Indian government ministry. The ministry portfolio is currently held by Bhupender Yadav, Union Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
The ministry is responsible for planning, promoting, coordinating, and overseeing the implementation of environmental and forestry programmes in the country. The main activities undertaken by the ministry include conservation and survey of the flora of India and fauna of India, forests and other wilderness areas; prevention and control of pollution; Indian Himalayan Environment and its sustainable development; afforestation, and land degradation mitigation. It is responsible for the administration of the national parks of India.

The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is the cadre controlling authority of the Indian Forest Service (IFS), one of the three All India Services.


== History ==
Environmental debates were  first introduced into the national political agenda during Indira Gandhi's first term as Prime Minister of India. The 4th Five-Year Plan (1969–74), for example, proclaimed "harmonious development [...] on the basis of a comprehensive appraisal of environmental issues." In 1977 (during the Emergency) Gandhi added Article 48A to the constitution stating that: "The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country." The same decree transferred wildlife and forests from state list to concurrent list of the constitution, thus giving the central government the power to overrule state decisions on that matter. Such political and constitutional changes prepared the groundwork for the creation of a federal Department of Environment in 1980, turned into the Ministry of Environment and Forests in 1985.
Although tackling climate change was already a responsibility of the ministry, its priority was raised when in May 2014 the ministry was renamed to the current title of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.


== Administration ==
The forest administration is based on demarcation of states into Forest Divisions which consists of Forest Ranges. Forest Beats under Ranges are the smallest unit of administration hierarchy. Natural features on the field form the boundaries of each beat which has an average area of around 16 km square.


== Organisation ==
Indian Forest Service (IFS)
Authorities
Central Zoo Authority of India, New Delhi
National Biodiversity Authority, Chennai
National Tiger Conservation Authority, New Delhi
Subordinate offices
Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development Corporation (Public Sector Undertaking)
Animal Welfare Board of India, Chennai
Botanical Survey of India (BSI), Kolkata
Central Pollution Control Board
Environmental Information System (ENVIS)
Odisha State Pollution Control Board
Delhi Pollution Control Committee
Directorate of Forest Education
Forest Survey of India
Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy
National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board
National Board of Wildlife
National Institute of Animal Welfare
National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), New Delhi
National Zoological Park (NZP), New Delhi
Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), Kolkata
Centres of excellence
Centre for Environment Education, Ahmedabad
C. P. R. Environmental Education Centre, Chennai
Centre for Animals and Environment, Bangalore
Centre of Excellence in Environmental Economics, Chennai
Foundation for Revitalisation of Local Health Traditions, Bangalore
Centre for Ecological Sciences, Bangalore
Centre for Environmental Management of Degraded Ecosystem, New Delhi
Centre for Mining Environment, Dhanbad
Sálim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History (SACON), Coimbatore
Tropical Botanic Garden and Research Institute, Thiruvananthapuram
Autonomous institutions
G. B.Pant National Institute of Himalayan Environment, Almora
Indian Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal
Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training Institute, Bengaluru
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun
Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun


== Cabinet Ministers ==
Note: MoS, I/C – Minister of State (Independent Charge)


== Ministers of State ==


== Initiatives ==
In August 2019 Ministry of Environment released the Draft National Resource Efficiency Policy. It is a set of guidelines which envisions a future with environmentally  sustainable and equitable economic growth. The policy is guided by principle of reduction in primary resource consumption; creation of higher value with less material through resource efficient circular approach; waste minimization; material security and creation of employment opportunities and business model beneficial to cause of environment protection and restoration. It was based on the report of NITI Aayog and European Union titled, The strategy on resource efficiency. The policy seeks to set up a National Resource Efficiency Authority with core working group housed in the Ministry. It also plans to offer tax benefits on recycled materials and soft loans to set up waste disposal and material recovery facilities.
As of 8 December 2021, some states have received more than Rupees 47,000 crore for afforestation. The states are directed to channel this amount as compensatory afforestation which shall be used for plantations, assisted natural forest regeneration, forest fire-prevention, pest and disease control in forest, and expedite soil and moisture conservation works.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Autonomous Organisations