Gopaludu Bhoopaludu (transl. Shepherd and King) is a 1967 Indian Telugu-language swashbuckler film, produced by S. Bhavanarayana and Y. V. Rao under the Gauri Productions banner and directed by G. Viswanatham. It stars N. T. Rama Rao, Jayalalithaa and Rajasree, with music composed by S. P. Kodandapani.


== Plot ==
Once upon a time, there was a kingdom whose royal dynasty was cursed that the siblings assassinated each other for the past seven generations. At present, the Queen gives birth to twins when the King is slain by his younger brother, and he too dies. Queen gives one of the twins to the maid, who moves far away to avoid the adversity repeating. On the way, she becomes prey to a tiger and a sheepherder Mangamma rears the child. 
Years passed, and Gopi became a shepherd, and Raja became Emperor. And the Queen fixes his alliance with her brother Sripathi's daughter Padmavati. Raja is already in love with a wild belle, Rajani, and spends most of his time hunting. Besides, Veerabahu, his vicious cousin, waits for a shot to usurp the crown. He detects Raja's presence and edicts his acolytes to capture him. Gopi shields him when the two are surprised by the lookalike, and Raja dearly guests him to the fort. Whereat, the Queen discerns him as the long-lost twin and is frightened of the future. Parallelly, Gopi & Padma fall in love. Once Raja swaps with Gopi to hang out with Rajani, on the full moon day, tournaments are held in the capital, and Raja moves but is captured by Veerabahu. Gopi is under dichotomy at the fort, and he participates and triumphs. 
Ergo, Veerabahu beholds the existence of two and calls Mangamma when Gopi refuses to recognize her. The Queen alleges Gopi suspected him when he rebuked her for getting the fact. Forthwith, Gopi rushed for Mangamma and apologizes. Overhearing it, Padma notifies Sripati, but Gopi seizes everything since he is enacting as a monarch to secure the kingdom from Veerabahu. Following various tricks in disguise, he finds Raja's whereabouts. Rajani also sees Raja's custody and lands therein. Gopi guards Raja at extreme peril and stamps out Veerabahu. At this point, the queen senses idolization is beyond fate and about divulging the actuality. However, Gopi bars her because the world should not get her wrong and quits. Overhearing it, Raja changes his intention. Finally, the movie ends on a happy note with the marriages of Raja & Rajani and Gopi & Padma.


== Cast ==
N. T. Rama Rao as Raja and Gopi (dual role)
Jayalalitha as Rajini
Rajasree as Padmavathi Devi
Rajanala as Veerabahu
Satyanarayana as Bheemanna
Padmanabham as Kopiri
Allu Ramalingaiah as Mahanasa
Mikkilineni as Sripathi
Prabhakar Reddy as Kunthala Maharaju
Jagga Rao as Bandi
S. Varalakshmi as Raja Maata
Hemalatha as Mangamma
Vanisri as Madhuram


== Soundtrack ==

Music composed by S. P. Kodandapani.  


== References ==


== External links ==
Gopaludu Bhoopaludu at IMDb