The Romance of Tiger and Rose (Chinese: 传闻中的陈芊芊; pinyin: Chuánwén Zhōng De Chén Qiānqiān) is a 2020 Chinese streaming television series starring Zhao Lusi and Ding Yuxi, and tells the story of a young screenwriter who must survive after being trapped in her own script, with her character meant to die early in the story. The series airs on Tencent Video starting May 18, 2020.
The series became a hit on social media, with its hashtag garnering over 3 billion hits on Weibo. By June 2, the series received over 897 million views on Tencent Video.


== Synopsis ==
Despite facing criticism from fellow staff, Chen Xiaoqian (Zhao Lusi) exerts all her energy writing her drama screenplay. After falling into a well-earned nap, she finds herself transported into her own screenplay. She becomes the hated third princess, Chen Qianqian, who is scheduled to be killed by the male lead Han Shuo (Ding Yuxi) by episode three. Armed with knowledge of her own story, Chen Xiaoqian must struggle to keep herself alive as well as advance the plot forward by bringing her two lead characters together.


== Cast ==
Main cast

Zhao Lusi as Chen Xiaoqian, a screenwriter / Chen Qianqian, infamous Third Princess of Huayuan city.
Dang Yixin as young Qianqian
Ding Yuxi as Han Shuo, Prince of Xuanhu City
Sheng Yinghao as Pei Heng, Minister of Education, Qianqian's fiance.
Zhou Zixin as Chen Chuchu, Second Princess of Huayuan City.
Shentu Hanqian as young Chuchu
Supporting Cast

Quan Peilun as Su Mu, top musician and courtesan.
Xiao Wei as Lin Qi, young mistress of the Lin family, managing the Royal Academy.
Chen Minghao as Su Ziying, Pei Heng's subordinate.
Zhao Xin as Chen Yuanyuan, Eldest Princess of Huayuan City
Hu Caihong as Chief of Huayuan City
Wu Yijia as Zi Rui, Chen Qianqian's servant
Liu Shuyuan as Baiji, Han Shuo's servant
Pan Luyu as Zi Nian
Li Ang as Sang Qi
Zhang Bofan as Zi Zhu
Han Zhigang as Housekeeper of Lin Manor
Jin Yanqing as Pei Heng's subordinate
Liu Xin as Storyteller
Xue Yilun as Storyteller
Wang Ming as Storyteller
Guo Jiayi as Minister Hang, spy of Xuanhu city
Zhang Haocheng as Chief of Xuanhu city, Han Shuo's father.
Zhang Tingting as Madame of Xuanhu city, Han Shuo's mother.
Ge Hao as Xuanhu envoy
Shen Chi as Meng Guo
Ji Shan as Minister Liu
Zhang Haoge as Zhang Yide
Zhang Minghe as Minister Han
Ning Xianzhou as Agent
Fu Qiang as General Li
Fu Jingying as Miss Li
Qiu Xiao as Miss Wang
Shi Yan as Ceremonial Official
Deng Ziyu as Examiner
Zheng Yunjie as Judge


== Production and release ==
The show was filmed between August and October 2019 at Hengdian World Studios. The first poster and trailer was released on April 29, 2020, and was announced on May 11 of its exclusive broadcast on Tencent Video.


== Soundtrack ==

The Romance of Tiger and Rose OST's producer is Hong Chuan, who also worked on The Sleuth of the Ming Dynasty (2020) and Wait in Beijing (2020) original soundtracks.


== Reception ==
The Romance of Tiger and Rose has currently earned a 7.5 on Douban with more than 162,000 user reviews. It has been praised for its interesting setup and plot, although the gender swap dynamics presented in its matriarchal setting have been criticized for being inconsistent in its portrayal.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Romance of Tiger and Rose on Weibo
The Romance of Tiger and Rose on Douban