Karl Worner (born 16 June 2002) is a professional Australian rules footballer who plays for the Fremantle Football Club in the Australian Football League (AFL).


== Early Career ==
Originally from Victoria, Karl played for the Oakleigh Chargers in the Talent League.
Although he was drafted in 2021, border restrictions due to the Covid-19 pandemic meant he was unable to travel from Victoria to Western Australia until February of the following year. He spent 2022 playing for Fremantle's reserve side, Peel Thunder in the West Australian Football League. Worner was impressive on debut collecting 31 disposals and kicking two goals against East Fremantle.


== AFL career ==
Worner was selected by Fremantle in their 1st selection and 8th overall in the 2022 rookie draft. In June 2023, Worner signed a 2-year contract extension keeping him at Fremantle until the end of the 2025 AFL season. Worner made his debut for Fremantle in Round 17 of the 2023 AFL season for their clash against Carlton. Worner started as the substitute and was substituted in for Matthew Johnson during the 3rd quarter. Worner finished his debut match with 7 disposals, a mark, and a tackle. After suffering a minor injury during his debut, Worner returned to the WAFL for a few weeks before coming back into the senior side to play the final 3 matches of the season for Fremantle.
Worner made the line-up for Fremantle's opening game of the 2024 AFL season against the Brisbane Lions at Optus Stadium, he played well collecting 12 disposals during the match. Unfortunately, Worner was knocked unconscious in the third quarter after an accidental collision with Lions player Lincoln McCarthy. He suffered a concussion which placed him under the AFL's mandatory concussion protocols, meaning he would miss at least one week of football. He would make his return through the WAFL, and returned to the Dockers line-up in round fourteen against the Western Bulldogs at Marvel Stadium, as a late replacement for Heath Chapman.


== Statistics ==
Updated to the end of 2023.


== References ==


== External links ==
Karl Worner's profile on the official website of the Fremantle Football Club
Karl Worner's playing statistics from AFL Tables