Okinawan cuisine (沖縄料理, Okinawa ryōri) is the cuisine of the Okinawa Prefecture of Japan. The cuisine is also known as Ryūkyūan cuisine (琉球料理, Ryūkyū ryōri), a reference to the Ryukyu Kingdom. Due to differences in culture, historical contact between other regions, climate, vegetables and other ingredients, Okinawan cuisine differs from mainland Japanese cuisine.


== History ==
Okinawan cuisine incorporates influences from Chinese cuisine and Southeast Asian cuisine due to its long history of trade. The sweet potato, introduced in Okinawa in 1605, became a staple food in Okinawa from then until the beginning of the 20th century. Goya (bitter melon) and nabera (luffa or towel gourd) were "likely" introduced to Okinawa from Southeast Asia. Since Ryukyu had served as a tributary state to China, Ryukyuan cooks traveled to Fujian Province to learn how to cook Chinese food; Chinese influence seeped into Okinawa in that manner. Pork, which plays an important role in the Okinawan diet, diffused in the seventeenth century in response to demands from Chinese ambassadors, who preferred it to beef. The trade with Siam (Thailand) also introduced the use of Thai Indica Rice which is used for the distillation of awamori from the 15th century. After the lord of the Satsuma Domain invaded the Ryukyus, Okinawan cooks traveled to Japan to study Japanese cuisine, causing that influence to seep into Okinawan cuisine.
Okinawa was administered by the United States after World War II, during which time various canned foods were popularized. American hamburger shops entered into the Okinawa market earlier than on the mainland. It was during this period that Okinawans became familiar with Americanized food culture. The cuisine has evolved in modern times, especially because of the American military presence on Okinawa since the end of World War II.


== Character ==
Besides vegetables and fruits, the influences of southern and southeastern Asia are evident in Okinawan cuisine in its use of herbs and spices, such as turmeric, used in Okinawa more often than in mainland Japan, but less frequently than other tropical island cuisines. Okinawan cuisine's condiments consist mainly of salt, miso, bonito flakes (katsuobushi) or kombu. Compared to mainland diets, Okinawan dishes do not use as many kinds of mushroom. 
Despite being surrounded by the sea, Okinawans eat relatively little seafood compared to other maritime cultures. Fish and other seafood products were traditionally difficult to preserve in the high temperatures of the Okinawan islands. Additionally, the islands are surrounded by relatively few fish species. The primary preparations of fish are pickling in salt (shio-zuke), dried, grilled, simmered in soy sauce (nitsuke), and as kamaboko, a processed seafood product typically made from white fish. Sashimi is served in Okinawa, but is limited by the inability to retain freshness due to high temperatures on the islands. Sashimi, unlike on the main islands of Japan, is not part of a full course meal.
Okinawans make salad, soup, or tempura using seaweeds like
mozuku and hijiki. Okinawan cuisine frequently uses kombu (kelp), not only in making soup stock, but also in preparing braised dishes, stir fried dishes and so on. Although it is not cultivated in the region, Okinawa is one of the largest consumers of kombu in Japan. 
Okinawan staple foods are traditionally potatoes, such as sweet potato or taro root, but they are substituted to rice or wheat flour, then Okinawans developed original dishes such as taco rice.
After the end of the occupation, they still have original food cultures, and Americanized foods are frequently eaten in their diets. But, Okinawan people do not consume dairy foods so much, such as milk and cheese. Bread is not so popular as a staple food.


== Ingredients ==
Meat and meat products
Pork
Soki
Beef
Goat
Fish
Abasu (porcupinefish)
Gurukun (double-lined fusilier)
Soreru (silver-stripe round herring)
Fruit
Pineapples
Papayas
Mangoes
Passion fruit
Guavas
Citrus fruit
Vegetables
Cabbage
Goya/bitter melon
Hechima/Luffa
Shikuwasa
Yams
Taro root
Seaweed
Garlic
Onions
Tomato
Salad leaves
Bean products
Aomame
Tofu
Grains and grain products
White rice
Brown rice
Seitan


== Common Okinawan dishes ==


=== Main dishes ===
Gōyā chanpurū
Jūshī
Okinawa soba
Rafute (Shoyu pork)
Taco rice
Minudaru (steamed pork)


=== Side dishes ===
Mimigā (ミミガー) (pig's ear)
Umi-budō
Hirayachi
Tofuyo dish


=== Alcoholic beverages ===
Awamori
Orion beer


=== Sweets ===
Beniimo (紅芋)
Chinsukō
Fuchagi (mochi with sweet beans)
Jīmami dōfu (peanut-tofu squares)
Sata andagi
Muchi
Okinawan brown sugar


== References ==