Union of Muslim Students' Associations (MSA) is an umbrella body representing the members of all respective Muslim Student Association chapters, regional bodies and other, across South Africa. 
Established in 1974, the MSA is represented at almost every major university in South Africa, through its chapters.
It has grown to be one of the largest student representative bodies in South Africa, representing South African Muslim students at a provincial, national and international level.
MSA Union’s vision is to assist in the development of Muslim students and to see a Muslim role model in every facet of society.


== Commitments ==
The MSA is committed to:

Using Islamic guidelines in all that it does, remembering that all it does is for the pleasure of Allah (SWT).
Being transparent, accountable and effective in governance.
Being sustainable in all regards I.e. socially, environmentally and economically.
Work in the best interest of all Muslim students in South Africa.
Maintain balance with regard to ideology. One way of Islamic thinking will not be granted superiority over another as long as the way of thinking believes in one Allah (SWT) and the Muhammad (SAW) is the final messenger.


== MSA Chapters in South Africa ==
Below is a list of MSA Chapters in South Africa:• MSA Tuks
• MSA Wits
• MSA Wits Medical & Education Campus
• MSA UCT
• MSA UCT Medical Campus
• MSA UKZN
• MSA UKZN Howard College
• MSA UKZN Nelson Mandela School of Medicine
• MSA UJ DFC
• MSA UJ APK
• MSA UWC
• MSA Stellenbosch
• MSA Rhodes
• MSA University of the Free State
• MSA Tygerberg
• MSA Tygerberg Medical Campus
• MSA NWU Vaal
• MSA NWU Potchefstroom
• MSA CPUT Bellville
• MSA CPUT Mowbray
• MSA CPUT District Six
• MSA Sefako Makgatho Health Sciences University
• MSA Nelson Mandela University
• MSA University of Limpopo


== MSA National Camp ==
An annual camp is held where all members of MSA's across the country are invited to participate in discussions around issues affecting MSA's in general, as well covering aspects of Muslim leadership in the South African context.


== The Message Magazine ==
The Message Magazine is currently (2009) a national student magazine, produced and published by MSA members from many different universities. It began (2001) as a monthly newsletter by the MSA at the University of Natal - Durban and was edited and produced by Bilal Randeree and Mariam Jhaveri. By 2003, the newsletter had become a full colour glossy magazine, still produced out of Durban, but with contributors and distribution nationally.


== MSA Union Committees ==
Below is a historic list of MSA Union Committees:
2024/25:

Mohammed Aasim Khan
Saajidah Motara
Naseeha Omar
Razina Mahomed
Mikhaeel Patel
Imaad Noormohamed
Tahiya Moosa-Wadiwala
Ahmed Ghoor
Daiyaan Peterson
Kowthar Peters
Muaawiyah Dadabhay
Haroun Samuels
Tasneem Mohamed
Mariam Jacobs
Faeeq Gamiet
Osman Cassim
Mohammad Noor Banzi
Azraa Seedat
Ameer Adams
2020/21

Muhammad Shakeel Garda (President)
Aqeelah Hendrickse (Deputy President)
Mogamat Saabik Kader (Treasurer General- Upto August 2020)
Naseeba Sadak (Secretary General)
Zaynab Cader (Deputy Secretary General)
Talha Khan (Treasurer General- August 2020- end of term)
Shafeeqah Lakay
Aasif Bulbulia (Tarbiyah & Training)
Amaarah Garda (Politics- SA & International Affairs)
Rashid Adam Cader (Community Outreach & Development)
Wazier Kariem Kara (Brand Manager)
Shalan Dorothy Ferreira (Campus Affairs & Emerging Markets)
Mohammed Uzair Bhamjee (Campus Affairs & Emerging Markets)
Ammaarah Arendse (Social Media)
2018/19

Kaamil Alli (President)
Aisha Hamdulay (Deputy President)
Irfaan Mangera (Secretary General)
Mishkah Abdool Sattar (Deputy Secretary Genera)
Abduraghmaan Farou
Muzammil Jable (Treasurer General)
Ayesha Moola
Muhammad Shakeel Garda (Campus Affairs & Emerging Markets)
Azminah Jhetam (Politics- SA & International Affairs)


== References ==


== External links ==
University of Cape Town Muslim Students Association (UCT MSA)
University of Pretoria Muslim Students Association (TUKS MSA)