Rugrats includes a large array of characters: family, friends, extended relatives, townspeople, and fictional characters. This is a list of characters from the original 1990s Nickelodeon animated television series, its various films, its All Grown Up! spin-off, and the 2020s reboot.


== Main characters ==


=== Rugrats ===


==== Tommy ====

Thomas Malcolm "Tommy" Pickles (voiced by E. G. Daily, Tami Holbrook in the unaired pilot) is the older son of Stu and Didi Pickles and serves as the series' main protagonist. Tommy, a 1-year-old, is portrayed as remembering the day of his birth in the episode "Stu-Maker's Elves". He lives with his parents and younger brother. Numerous episodes are set in the Pickles family home, focusing on Tommy and his family. In the series premiere episode, "Tommy's First Birthday", he is a 1-year-old and seems to remain that age throughout the entirety of the show. Tommy is the youngest of the babies until the birth of his brother in The Rugrats Movie. As an infant, Tommy is often seen crawling and walking somewhat unsteadily and pigeon-toed. He uses his diaper as a pocket, storing his screwdriver and other things he finds. Tommy is a brave child with a strong sense of justice, always eager for adventure and unafraid to stand up for what is right. His best friends are Chuckie and his dog, Spike. In the episode "Mother's Day," it is indicated that Tommy was born full term, but he was spending the first week or two of his life in an incubator, which explains his bravery and lack of taking life for granted.


==== Chuckie ====
Charles Crandall Norbert "Chuckie" Finster Jr. (voiced by Christine Cavanaugh from 1991 to 2000, Nancy Cartwright from 2000 to present) is the son of Charles "Chas" Finster, a widower and bureaucrat, and his late spouse, Melinda Finster, and is Tommy's best friend. Unlike Tommy, Chuckie is clumsy and timid, he rarely expresses any desire to go on one of the babies' adventures, instead listing all the reasons they should not go on one. Whenever Tommy and Dil's cousin Angelica try to bully them, Chuckie unquestionably accepts her treatment and gives in to any possible demands. Chuckie is 2 years old, making him the eldest of the babies, therefore he is the first of them to be potty trained. Like Tommy, according to the episode "Stu-Maker's Elves", it is implied that he also remembers the day of his birth. In Rugrats in Paris: The Movie, Chuckie adds a Japanese stepmother, Kira Watanabe—who later adopts him—and a younger stepsister, Kimi. He also says his first word, "NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!" to the grown-ups when he eventually stops his archenemy, Coco LaBouche from marrying Chas. His character design was loosely based on Mark Mothersbaugh, the lead composer for the series.


==== Angelica ====

Angelica Charlotte Pickles (voiced by Cheryl Chase) is the 3-year-old daughter of Drew and Charlotte Pickles, Stu and Didi's niece, and Tommy and Dil's cousin. Angelica serves as the series' antagonist, regularly threatening the babies physically, verbally, manually, financially, or sometimes psychologically and lying to them for her amusement. In her own home, Angelica is an only child who lives with her workaholic mom and busy working father, who shower her with toys and admiration. Without any parental guidance or boundaries, Angelica has largely been left to determine for herself what is right and wrong, with her idea of "right" normally being what she wants. She is materialistic, devious, and self-centered. Though she torments the babies, Angelica stands up for them against others and expresses a genuine desire to be friends with them. The season 3 penultimate episode "Moving Away" explains how she and the babies first met each other, although this episode is presumably non-canon due to contradictions from others.


==== Phil and Lil ====
Phillip Richard "Phil" DeVille and Lillian Marie "Lil" DeVille (both voiced by Kath Soucie) are the children of Howard and Betty DeVille. They live next door to Tommy and are fraternal twins, with Lil older than Phil by two minutes. Often named "Lil and Phil", they share many similarities, including the same hairstyle and love for dirt and eating bugs and earthworms. They argue with one another frequently, and they almost always call each other by their full name, rarely ever referring to each other as "Phil and Lil". Looking so much alike, they are often mistaken for one another by adults, with the main facial difference between the two being that Phil's earlobes are attached while Lil's are not. They are both the same age as Tommy.


==== Susie ====
Susanna Yvonne "Susie" Carmichael (voiced by Cree Summer) is the younger daughter of Randy and Dr. Lucy Carmichael, and Tommy's neighbor. Her family buys a home on Tommy's street in "Meet the Carmichaels," and their mothers become close friends. Susie bonds well with the babies despite the age difference, considering them her friends. While she doesn't often get along with Angelica, she makes a conscious effort to be nice to her, serving as the voice of reason for Angelica's lies and generally being kinder to the babies. Like her mother, Susie excels in various aspects of her life and has a kind and warm attitude. Her only real character flaw is her competitiveness. She is African-American. While she was the same age as Angelica in the original series, she is 1-2 years old in the reboot, the same age as Chuckie, meaning that in the 2020s version, she was born in 2019.


==== Dil ====
Dylan Prescott "Dil" Pickles (voiced by Tara Strong) is the son of Stu and Didi Pickles, and Tommy's younger brother. He was born in the 1998 film The Rugrats Movie and is the youngest of the babies. Dil rarely partakes in their adventures and is often seen drooling, crying, or babbling. Because of his young age, most of the time Dil cannot understand the babies and the babies cannot understand him. However, he does mature in the sequel series All Grown Up!.


==== Kimi ====
"Kimi" Watanabe-Finster (voiced by Dionne Quan in 1991–2008, Charlet Chung in 2021–present) is the daughter of her biological father and mother, Hiro Watanabe and Kira Watanabe-Finster and is Chuckie's older Japanese stepsister. Her mother marries Chuckie's father Chas in Rugrats in Paris: The Movie and he later adopts her, assuming the role of her father. Kimi's boldness enables her to interact easily with the other babies, especially Tommy. She is protective of her young brother, while at the same time encouraging him to stand up for himself. She was born in October 5, 1988. She is Japanese-American. While she was 2 and a half years old in the original series, she is 3 years old in the reboot, making her around the same age as Angelica, and acts as the voice of reason instead of Susie.


==== Spike ====
Spike (voiced by Michael Bell in a dream sequence in the episode "In the Dreamtime", Bruce Willis in Rugrats Go Wild) is the Pickles' family dog. Though he appears in almost every episode of the series, he is not usually featured as a main part of episodes. Tommy claims him to be his best "animal" friend. The character is considered a main character in the series, appearing in almost three-quarters of all of the episodes, though he usually does not come along when the Rugrats venture to new locations. It is mentioned in "Spike Runs Away" that his breed is a fictional "Siberian Tiger Hound". As shown in The Rugrats Movie and Rugrats Go Wild, Spike is very protective of the babies as he sees them as part of his family.


== Family members ==
Stuart Louis "Stu" Pickles (voiced by Jack Riley as an adult in 1991–2008, E. G. Daily as a baby in "Sour Pickles", Tress MacNeille as a baby in "Fountain of Youth", Tommy Dewey in 2021–present) is Tommy and Dil's easygoing father and younger brother of Drew. He is an absent-minded toy inventor who only wants to be a good provider for his family, although he would often act like the titular babies. He is married to Didi Pickles and has been Chas' best friend since childhood.. It is implied in the All Grown Up! special that Stu's birthday is on or around October 23, as his birthday falls on the cusp of Libra and Scorpio. In each Rugrats film, either Stu's actions or inventions help set the story in motion. By the story's end, he somehow manages to save the day.
Didila "Didi" Pickles (née Kropotkin) (voiced by Melanie Chartoff in 1991–2008, Ashley Rae Spillers in 2021–present) is Tommy and Dil's mother. She is a part-time teacher and married to Stu. It is revealed that she is coulrophobic, just like Chuckie Finster. Didi is also a Russian-Jewish American with two Russian-Jewish parents, and she may have been born in Russia. In the reboot series, Didi became a professional blogger and an artist. Arlene Klasky said that she based the character on herself. Out of all the adults, she takes the child psychologist Dr. Werner Lipschitz the most seriously.
Grandpa Louis Kalhern "Lou" Pickles (voiced by David Doyle in 1991–1997; Joe Alaskey in 1997–2008, Michael McKean in 2021–present) is Tommy, Dil, and Angelica's paternal grandfather and Stu and Drew's father. Called "Pop" by Stu, Drew, Didi, and Charlotte. Grandpa Lou lived with Stu's family for the majority of the series and often babysat the children until he occasionally dozed off. Originally named Stu Pickles, Sr. in the unaired pilot "Tommy Pickles and The Great White Thing". Lou would often bring up stories of his youth and even bring up historical moments involving his late brother Sparky. In World War II while training for the army, he crippled his right leg on his mattress and was discharged from the army, only to be drafted into the Navy. In the reboot series, Grandpa Lou is depicted as a hippie where he is shown with a ponytail, wearing tie-dye shirts, and often doing yoga. It is possible that in his youth he was a Vietnam veteran. Grandpa Lou's stories tended to be exaggerated and he also had an obsession with the number 15. In the reboot, he was born in 1945, while in the original he was born in 1915.
Andrew Louis "Drew" Pickles (voiced by Michael Bell in 1991–2008, Timothy Simons in 2021–present) is Angelica's busy working father and Stu's older brother, married to Charlotte. Like his sibling, he is something of a man-child. A well-paid investment banker, Drew does not always get along with his brother, and the two often bicker over petty problems. His catchphrase (when addressing Angelica) is "Princess". Drew is not afraid to put his foot down whenever Angelica gets into trouble and he is usually the one to punish her like not giving her dessert for a week, amongst other disciplinary actions.
Charlotte Pickles (voiced by Tress MacNeille in 1991–2008, Anna Chlumsky in 2021–present) is Angelica's workaholic mother, the CEO of her own company known as MegaCorp, and married to Drew. She tries to be a good mother but is usually sidetracked by business interests. She is often shown talking on her mobile phone to "Jonathan", who was shown several times during early episodes of the series. Charlotte also calls Angelica by "Princess". She is also seen to punish Angelica if she catches her causing trouble in episodes when Drew is not present. In the reboot, she is a councilperson and their house is significantly larger than the one in the original.
Elizabeth "Betty" DeVille (voiced by Kath Soucie in 1991–2008, Natalie Morales in 2021–present) is Phil and Lil's mother, a former wrestler, and Didi's best friend. Very athletic and feminist. Married to Howard, she helps operate the Java Lava Coffee House with Chas Finster. In the reboot series, Betty is portrayed as a lesbian single mother. Betty also owns a coffee house in the reboot series, but now as sole proprietor of the renamed Betty's Beans. Morales stated "Anyone who watched the original show may have had an inkling Betty was a member of the Alphabet Mafia".
Howard "Howie" DeVille (voiced by Phil Proctor) is Phil and Lil's mild-mannered stay at home father who is unemployed. Howie is often overpowered by, and cringing towards, his wife Betty. Though Howard has not appeared in the reboot series yet, he did make a picture frame cameo in "Tooth or Share".
Charles Norbert "Chas" Finster Sr. (voiced by Michael Bell in 1991–2008, Tony Hale in 2021–present) is Chuckie's father, from whom he inherited his adenoidal whine. He is hinted to be a chess enthusiast in several episodes. He is a bureaucrat and married Kira in the second Rugrats movie where he became Kimi's stepfather. Chas runs the Java Lava Coffee House with his wife, and Betty in later episodes. Stu has been Chas' best friend since childhood. Chas played a minor role in the first Rugrats film and has supporting roles in the second and third. He is a musician in the reboot series. He is just as if as sensitive if not more than Chuckie.
Kira Watanabe-Finster (voiced by Julia Kato in 1991–2008, Hiromi Dames in 2021–present) is Kimi's Japanese mother and Chuckie's stepmother who started out as an employee at EuroReptarLand. Kira married Chas in Rugrats in Paris: The Movie. On All Grown Up!, she operates the Java Lava Coffee House with her husband and Betty. She somewhat plays the straight woman to the rest of the adults' wackiness, but she enjoys showcasing and trying new things, as opposed to everyone else. In the reboot series, Kira and Kimmie moved from France. While not married to Chas yet, she did become friends with him. Kira works as a librarian.
Dr. Lucille "Lucy" Carmichael (voiced by Cheryl Carter in 1991–1996, Lisa Dinkins (1993), Hattie Winston in 1997–2008, Nicole Byer in 2021–present) is Susie's mother and Randy's wife. She is a Harvard-educated "wonder mom", and has a job as a doctor, having delivered Dil, and removed Susie's tonsils. The latter would have been unethical in real life since Susie is related to Lucille.
Randall "Randy" Carmichael (voiced by Ron Glass in 1991–2008, Omar Benson Miller in 2021–present) is married to Lucy Carmichael and is Susie's father. In the original series, Randy is a screenwriter for the famous cartoon The Dummi Bears Show, which, like the show's creator Paul Gatsby, he is not particularly proud of. In the reboot, however, he is a high school science teacher and is much more free-spirited than his OG counterpart, who enjoys playing video games with Stu, Drew, and Chas.
Louise "Lulu" Jonston-Pickles (voiced by Debbie Reynolds) is a nurse at the local hospital, with whom Lou fell in love. She eventually marries Lou in Rugrats in Paris, thus becoming Drew and Stu's stepmother and Angelica, Tommy and Dil's step-grandmother.


== Other recurring ==


=== Babies and children ===
The Carmichaels' children are Susie's older siblings.
Alisa Jasmine Carmichael (voiced by Kath Soucie in "The Last Babysitter", Bettina Bush in later episodes) is the oldest daughter of the Carmichaels and Susie's older sister. She is often talking on the phone. In All Grown Up!, she is married and has a baby.
Buster Franklin Carmichael (voiced by Kath Soucie in "The Last Babysitter", Joey Wilcots in "Runaway Reptar", Crystal Scales in "A Rugrats Kwanzaa", Bumper Robinson in All Grown Up!, Dana Davis in 2021-present) is one of Susie's older brothers and the athlete of the family. He appeared as a teen in the All Grown Up! episode "In the Family's Way". In the 2021 reboot, he appears as Susie's cousin instead of her brother, being only Edwin's brother.
Edwin Winston Cranstall Louis Xavier Quincy Carmichael III (voiced by Pat Musick in "Tooth or Dare", Cree Summer in "Dill We Meet Again" to "A Rugrats Kwanzaa", Ogie Banks in All Grown Up, Bahia Watson in 2021-presents) is one of Susie's older brothers, being the smart kid in the family. He appeared as a teen in the All Grown Up! episode "In the Family's Way". In the 2021 reboot, he appears as Susie's cousin instead of her brother, being only Buster's brother.
The McNultys are five brothers that serve as counterparts of Angelica and Tommy's gang, being similar to them:
Timmy McNulty (voiced by Tara Strong) is the oldest of the five McNulty boys. He serves as a counterpart of Angelica.
Todd McNulty (voiced by Grey DeLisle) and Ty McNulty (voiced by E. G. Daily in "The 'Lympics", Grey DeLisle in later episodes) are the twins of the McNulty boys. They serve as counterparts of Phil and Lil.
Terry McNulty (voiced by Grey DeLisle, understudied by E. G. Daily in "Fugitive Tommy") is the second born of the McNulty boys. He serves as a counterpart of Chucky.
Teddy McNulty (voiced by Tara Strong) is the youngest of the McNulty boys. He serves as a counterpart of Tommy.
Harold Frumpkin (voiced by Pat Musick) is a child in Angelica and Susie's pre-school class. In All Grown Up!, he also goes with them to high school.
Sarah "Taffy" Maynston (voiced by Amanda Bynes) is Lulu's teenage grandniece making her the step-relative of the Pickles family when Lulu married Lou. She was hired as a regular babysitter for the babies. Taffy is the lead singer of a band, Taffy and the Saltwaters. She always calls the babies "Minis". Taffy was also the one who narrates the fairy tales to the "Minis" in the Tales from the Crib specials.
Savannah Violeta Shane (voiced by Shayna Fox) is the most popular girl in school in All Grown Up!, who Angelica Pickles is jealous of. She often competes with Angelica, feeling she'll never lose, but Savannah never actually wins. Angelica is always saying Savannah invites her to her parties, in the TVIP (Totally Very Important Person), which is not true. She is also one of the students in Angelica and Susie's preschool class in Rugrats Pre-School Daze.


=== Adults ===


==== Pickles family relatives ====
The members and relatives of the Pickles family includes:

Boris Kropotkin and (voiced by Michael Bell in 1991–2008, Henry Winkler in 2021–present) and Minka Kerpackter (voiced by Melanie Chartoff in 1991–2008 and Swoosie Kurtz in 2021–present) are Didi's father and mother, and thus Tommy and Dill's maternal grandparents. Both are Jews who emigrated from Russia and retain thick accents and traditions from "The Old Country".
Beatrix "Trixie" McGee-Pickles is Tommy, Dill, and Angelica's deceased grandmother, Drew and Stu's mother; and Lou's first wife. Having died before the show's earliest episode, she appears only in Grandpa Lou's flashbacks in the episode "Grandpa's Date". Little is known about her, although at one point, it is mentioned that she worked on Estes Kefauver's campaign for the Democratic Presidential Nomination of 1956.
Great Aunt 'T'" Adegoke (voiced by Irma P. Hall) and Uncle Charles Kojo (voiced by Bill Cobbs) are the great aunt and uncle of Susie and her siblings.
Benjamin "Ben" Kropotkin (voiced by Jeff Bennett) is Didi's younger brother and Elaine's husband. In his first appearance, he is about to marry a woman named Elaine (referring to the characters of the same names in The Graduate) who briefly disappears before the wedding because of cold feet. The married couple appears again to babysit the Rugrats in "Baby Maybe" as an experience for having their own children but unpleasantly discovers that raising children may not be so simple.
Elaine Robinson Kropotkin (voiced by Tress MacNeille in "Let Them Eat Cake", Meagen Fay in "Baby Maybe") is Ben's wife and Didi's sister-in-law. In her first appearance in "Let Them Eat Cake", she marries Ben. Elaine appears also in "Baby Maybe" where she and Ben watch over Angelica and the babies to prepare for having possible kids of their own.
Miriam "Mim" Pickles (voiced by Andrea Martin) is known as the "money game queen" because she plays poker, and constantly irritates her younger cousin, Grandpa Lou. Her family calls her "Aunt Miriam" even though Stu, Drew, Tommy, and Dil are her cousins. She always mispronounces Didi's name. It is implied her relationship with Lou as a child mirrors Tommy and Angelica's relationship. She later helps Lou move into a retirement home.
McGrew "Mackie" Pickles (voiced by Andy Houts) and Edie Pickles (voiced by Kath Soucie) are the parents of Emmet Pickles and relatives of Stu, Drew, Tommy, and Angelica. When Drew went to change out of his dirty clothes, Angelica thought that they were her new parents.


==== Relatives of the other families ====
Melinda Finster (voiced by Kim Cattrall) is Chuckie's birth mother. She loved flowers, and she died a few months after Chuckie's birth, long before the show began. She is only seen in flashbacks, although she is referenced several times in the series.
Shirley Dalmond Finster (voiced by Miriam Margolyes) and Charles Mervyn "Marvin" Finster (voiced by Stacy Keach) are Chas' parents, and Chuckie and Kimi's paternal grandparents.
Freddie (voiced by Rodger Bumpass) is Betty's older brother and uncle of the twins who only appears in the "Brothers Are Monsters" episode. His behavior and dress sense are similar to his sister's, except he wears his sweater with the Male symbol on the front.
Colleen McNulty (voiced by Teresa Ganzel) is the McNulty boys' mother. She appears in "A Very McNulty Birthday" and "Wash Dry Story". Her husband Colin has not been seen.
Conan McNulty (voiced by Michael Keenan) is the McNulty boys' paternal grandfather and Lou's rival since childhood.
Tia Esperanza (voiced by Tata Vega) is the aunt of Betty who appears in the 2021 series.


==== Other adults ====
Larry (voiced by Scott Menville in most appearances, Jeremy Sisto in "Angelica Orders Out") and Steve (voiced by Scott Menville) are two teenage boys who always seem to have different odd jobs, such as painters, movie theater attendants, and grocery store employees. They are named after two producers of some episodes. Larry later appeared in the episode "Angelica Orders Out" as a caterer for Zippy's Snappy Home Delivery, but his hair was dyed red.
Jonathan Kraskel (voiced by René Auberjonois in "Mommy's Little Assets", Dan Castellaneta in "Jonathan Babysits" to "Lost at Sea", Antony Del Rio in 2021-Present) is Charlotte's meek personal assistant at Mega Corp who she constantly yells at. He was originally portrayed with dark skin, but had fair skin in later appearances. In "Lost at Sea", the company Jonathan and Charlotte worked at has become reorganized and Jonathan is named the new CEO. In the 2021 reboot, Jonathan is depicted as a Hispanic man.
Dr. Werner Lipschitz (voiced by Tony Jay) is a child psychologist whom Stu, Didi, and Chas commonly consult for parenting assistance.
Alan Quebec (voiced by Alex Trebek) is a game show host who hosted "Super Stumpers", the fictitious game show on which Didi Pickles appears in the episode "Game Show Didi".
Miss Weemer (voiced by Vicki Lewis) is Angelica and Susie's teacher in pre-school.
Macie Jonston is Lulu's sister and Taffy's grandmother who became the step-relative of the Pickles family when Lulu married Lou.
Miranda "Anda" Smellson is Taffy's mother, Macie's daughter, and Lulu's niece.


=== Pets ===
Fifi is a purple poodle, who was originally a Parisian stray which Spike fell in love with in the second Rugrats film and became his girlfriend.
Spiffy and Pepper are respectively purple and brown puppies adopted by the Stu Pickles and Chas Finster households. The offspring of a union between Spike and Fifi. In US showings of "Mutts in a Name", the puppy is identified as "Pepper" as a result of a viewer poll.
Fluffy is Angelica's cat whom Angelica loves dearly, but who always causes trouble for the others, particularly Spike. Some people do not notice it, but she looks just like Angelica.
Melville is Chuckie's first pet, a pillbug that died in Chuckie's first episode. At that point, Chuckie was training Melville to perform circus tricks.


=== Fictional characters in Rugrats ===
The following appear within the televisions and films within this franchise:


==== Reptar franchise ====
Reptar (voiced by Busta Rhymes in The Rugrats Movie, vocal effects provided by Fred Tatasciore in 2021–present) is a big green Tyrannosaurus mutated into a dinosaur-like kaiju that's reminiscent of Godzilla. Tommy and the other Rugrats love him. Reptar products such as cars, clothes, and candy are frequently seen on the show. Stu built a Reptar Wagon for Tommy in The Rugrats Movie. Reptar was a main character in Rugrats in Paris: The Movie and had his own theme park called Euro Reptarland. There was a giant Reptar robot in Euro Reptarland which the babies piloted and fought against Jean Claude. Reptar has had his own ice show, which Lou believes is "sheer brilliance". The babies interrupted it looking for a lizard which they believed was a "Baby Reptar".
Robosnail is Reptar's archenemy. Robosnail is a mechanical snail with snapping pincers. He made a special guest appearance in Rugrats in Paris: The Movie, controlled by Jean Claude. Robosnail and Reptar fought throughout Paris, and Robosnail wound up falling into the Seine.
Dactar is a big Pterodactyl who fights Reptar on TV. He resembles Rodan from Godzilla, which is ironic since they are generally depicted as allies despite their fighting in Ghidrah, the Three-Headed Monster and Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II.
Thorg (voiced by Phil Proctor) is a giant gorilla and Reptar's enemy. In the episode "Toy Palace", Tommy and Chuckie activate a large robotic Thorg, who chases them through the store, repeating his catchphrase "Thorg hungry! Thorg want eat!" He is made to resemble King Kong and has been sent back in time to when George Washington crossed the Delaware River.
The Mole People are Reptar's archenemies. It was mentioned by Tommy in "Jonathan Babysits" that Reptar once dug underground to avoid the Mole People.


==== Mega Hyper Heroes ====
The Mega Hyper Heroes are the superheroes that the babies watch on TV. The babies imitated the characters by calling themselves the "Mega Diaper Babies". They appear to be based on the Fantastic Four with elements of Captain Planet and the Planeteers, Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, and the Teen Titans. When four teenagers join their rings together, they become the Mega Hyper Heroes where they work to save Earth and the universe from various villains who would do something like hog the world's oxygen supply, drain the oceans, or blow up the universe.

Changeling/Johnny (voiced by Neil Ross) is the leader of the Mega Hyper Heroes. He is capable of adopting animal forms. Changeling's powers are similar to the powers of Beast Boy.
Miss Invisible/Diane (voiced by Kath Soucie) a member of the Mega Hyper Heroes. She is capable of invisibility. Miss Invisible is a parody of Invisible Woman.
Flaro/Marco (voiced by Gregg Berger) is a member of the Mega Hyper Heroes. He is capable of sudden ignition at the single flick of his wrist. Flaro is a parody of Human Torch
Bolt/Ricky (voiced by Jim Turner) is a member of the Mega Hyper Heroes. He capable of morphing into a tall, ultra-strong man where the narrator describes him as having the strength of two men.
Metallitron (voiced by Gregg Berger) is the robotic enemy of the Mega Hyper Heroes. Despite sounding like a male, Metallitron is actually a female. At one point, Metallitron tried to steal Earth's oceans.
Germaniac is a enemy of the Mega Hyper Heroes. Tommy mentioned him in a pep talk with the other babies by commenting that the Mega Hyper Heroes once stopped him from blowing up the universe.
Ratface is a character in the Mega Hyper Heroes show. His action figure was seen in "Wrestling Grandpa".


==== Blocky and Oxwinkle ====
Blocky and Oxwinkle is a parody of The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends.

Blocky (voiced by June Foray) and Oxwinkle are Stu and Drew's favorite cartoon characters as babies, a parody of Rocky and Bullwinkle. Blocky talks more than Oxwinkle.
Yuri and Svetlana (voiced by June Foray) are a pair of villains who try to trick and get rid of Blocky and Oxwinkle, calling them "Elk and Weasle". They are a parody of Boris and Natasha, and their nicknames for Blocky and Oxwinkle is a parody of "Moose and Squirrel". In an example of stunt casting, Foray, the original voice of Rocky as well as of Natasha, provided the voice of their Rugrats universe counterparts while Yuri is largely silent.


==== Other fictional charactersion ====
Cynthia (voiced by Tori Kelly in 2021–present) is Angelica Pickles' favorite doll. Based on the American doll, Barbie.
Captain Blasto (voiced by Adam West) from his early seasons, is a spaceman who hosts his namesake show, a low-budget local children's program reminiscent of the Captain Video series of the 1950s. In "Super Hero Chuckie", Chuckie, Angelica, Stu, and Drew watch the show's production.
The Dummi Bears (variously voiced by Nancy Cartwright and Christine Cavanaugh) are a cartoon watched by the babies, although it seldom interests them and Grandpa Lou, in particular, despises the program. The name is a play on Disney's Adventures of the Gummi Bears, while the show spoofs the Care Bears. Susie's father Randy Carmichael was a writer for the show, and in one episode, the babies are taken to a movie theater to see the Dummi Bears movie.
Goober the Gopher is a friendly, hug-loving character created by Lipschitz Industries as a friendly children's icon resembling Barney the Dinosaur. In one episode, the grownups got rid of the Reptar decor in the babies' room figuring it scared Dil, and replaced it with Goober the Gopher. This led the babies to get Reptar and Goober to fight for who should be the better mascot.


=== Real people ===
Chick Hearn (voiced by himself) appeared in the episode "Touchdown Tommy" as the sports anchor of a football game.
Pat Sajak (voiced by himself) appeared in the episode "Chuckie is Rich" as the host of a Publishers Clearing House-like contest where the $10 million grand prize was won by Chas Finster.


== Appearing in the films ==


=== Introduced in The Rugrats Movie ===
Scar Snout is a wolf with fiery red eyes, long V-shaped snout full of teeth and sharp claws who appears as the primary antagonist of The Rugrats Movie. It is also a sapient predator with Tyrannosaurus traits and the worst predator in the territory. Not much is known about its origins, though it was a sadistic, heartless and wrathful wolf who is responsible for killing anyone who trespasses into its territory, making it the most terrifying and feared creature in the forest for years. It stalks the babies throughout the movie. In the climax of the film, it tries to eat the babies after it scares the monkeys away until Spike, the Pickles' dog fights it on the bridge. As a result, both of them fall down the bridge where the babies are standing, but only Spike survives the fall, and Scar Snout falls in the river, ending its reign of terror. It's unknown what happened to it afterwards, but it's either that it also survived, or got killed in the river.
The Circus Monkeys are the central antagonists of The Rugrats Movie. They are a monkey band that escaped during a circus' local train accident. Throughout the movie, they try to take Dil away and kill him. In the climax of the film, they attempt to kidnap Tommy and Dil until they were scared off by the much bigger Scar Snout the wolf during the climax while cornering the babies on the bridge. In the end, they are redeemed and reunited with their owners just as the babies are reunited with their parents. During the reunion, they attacked Rex Pester, an annoying news reporter.
The Banana Brothers (voiced by Abe Benrubi and Phil Proctor) are ringmasters of the Banana Brothers Monkey Circus and owners of the monkeys.
Ranger Frank (voiced by David Spade) and Ranger Margaret (voiced by Whoopi Goldberg) are forest rangers who help the parents find the babies, and the first new characters to see the Reptar Wagon. Ranger Frank is cowardly and excitable, while Ranger Margaret is more calm and rational.
Rex Pester (voiced by Tim Curry) is a news reporter who pesters and annoys the adults' efforts to find the babies as well as Spike. He mispronounced the babies' names as well as mistaking the Reptar Wagon for a horse. At the end of the movie, when the babies and the monkeys are reunited with their parents and owners, he appears to be injured after his helicopter got crashed in the woods. He also gets attacked by the now redeemed monkeys.


=== Introduced in Rugrats in Paris: The Movie ===
Coco LaBouche (voiced by Susan Sarandon) is the main antagonist of the film. She runs the amusement park EuroReptarLand, a Japanese theme park in Paris. Her boss Mr. Yamaguchi is offering her the job of president of the company, but only if she learns to love children, to which she lies and says that she is engaged. This sets the climax for the film. The real reason she brought the Pickles and gang to France is so that Stu could fix Robo Reptar. She plans to marry Chas for promotion, but when discovered, the wedding is called off, and Mr. Yamaguchi eventually fires her, causing humiliation. Angelica steps on her wedding dress, causing it to rip to have her underwear shown in front of everyone, including some people with cameras.
Jean-Claude (voiced by John Lithgow) is Coco's right-hand assistant. He is loyal to his boss and helps her with the kidnapping of the babies. He usually has the job of telling Kira what to do, and he is more sensible than Coco. Jean-Claude also pilots Robosnail and seems to have fears of dogs as Spike chases him away from the Notre Dame Cathedral.
Mr. Yamaguchi (voiced by Mako) is the president of Yamaguchi Industries and Coco's boss. He made a cameo appearance in The Rugrats Movie, where his face is in a newspaper article holding a toy design contest, which inspired Stu to make the Reptar Wagon. In Rugrats in Paris, Mr. Yamaguchi appeared in person and planned to step down as president and find a successor who cares for children. Initially, Mr. Yamaguchi is fooled by Coco into believing she loves children and is engaged to Chuckie's father, Chas. This prompts him to pass over the promotion to Coco after the wedding. However, Yamaguchi is unaware that Coco despises children, including Chuckie, and only plans to marry Chas for promotion. In the end, Angelica and the babies interrupt the wedding, exposing Coco's plot and prompting an angry Yamaguchi to immediately fire her.


=== Introduced in Rugrats Go Wild ===

Eliza Thornberry (voiced by Lacey Chabert)
Darwin (voiced by Tom Kane)
Donnie Thornberry (voiced by Flea of the Red Hot Chili Peppers)
Debbie Thornberry (voiced by Danielle Harris)
Nigel Thornberry (voiced by Tim Curry)
Marianne Thornberry (voiced by Jodi Carlisle)
Siri (voiced by Chrissie Hynde of The Pretenders) is a rare Clouded leopard whom the Thornberrys are searching for. She lives on an island in South China Sea where the babies and their parents got stranded on.
Toa (voiced by Ethan Phillips) is a loris that lives on the South China Sea island that the babies and their parents got stranded on.


== See also ==
All Grown Up! § Cast and characters for the exclusive cast of the continuation series


== References ==