Chikkadu Dorakadu (transl. He cannot be caught, he cannot be found) is a 1967 Indian Telugu-language swashbuckler film directed by B. Vittalacharya and produced by Sri Lakshmi Narayana Productions. It stars N. T. Rama Rao, Kanta Rao, Jayalalithaa and Krishna Kumari, with music composed by T. V. Raju. The film was remade in Hindi as Jay Vejay (1977).


== Plot ==
Once upon a time, there were three kingdoms, Malawa, Pushpapuri, and Panchalapuram, which had together hidden a secret treasure for the welfare of the people at Bhuvaseswari Peetam and hid their route map in 3 different necklaces. Generations pass; the Malawa King, Dharmapala, does not have children. Taking this as an advantage, his brother-in-law Simhabala wants to grab the throne and forces Dharmapala to adopt his son Prachanda Sena. But God's wish is different; Dharmapala and his wife are blessed with twin boys. Simhabala secretly steals the children and orders his henchmen to kill them. Due to their loyalty toward the King, the soldiers separate them by keeping a letter that tells their identity. A burglar took care of one child as Chikkadu and another by a village lady, Amaravati Dilipa. Years roll by; Chikkadu is a kind-hearted robber whose goal is to rob the rich and feed the poor. Dilipa, with his intelligent attitude, acquires riches from his subordinate kings and utilizes them for the welfare of the people.
Once Dilipa meets the Panchalapuram Princess Padmavathi, both fall in love. But the Panchalapuram King says whoever finds the way to the Bhuvaneshwari treasure will win his daughter's hand. So, Dilipa moves to Pushpapuri for one of the necklaces. Meanwhile, Chikkadu also reaches Pushpapuri and swindles a devious dancer Manjuvani. Queen Priyamvada inquires about the case, where she notices Chikkadu's talent. Now, Priyamvada wants to acquire the remaining two necklaces using him. So, she makes acquaintance with Chikkadu disguised, but unfortunately, she falls for him. Here, Chikkadu, too, takes an oath to acquire the necklaces. Dilipa, in the name of "Dorakadu," starts searching for it. Simhabala sends his son Prachand to bring the necklace from Dharmapala. Prachanda steals the necklace and tries to kill the King when Chikkadu arrives and saves him. After scheming several steps on each other, Chikkadu & Dorakadu triumph over the three necklaces. Then, they fuse to detect and share the treasure. Simhabala & Prachanda also follow them. Midway, they learn their birth secret. At last, after many adventures, they reach the treasure, acquire it, and cease the brutality. Finally, the movie ends on a happy note with the marriage of Chikkadu with Priyamvada and Dorakadu with Padmavathi.


== Cast ==
N. T. Rama Rao as Chikkadu
Kanta Rao as Dorakadu / Dilipa Chakravarthy
Jayalalithaa as Priyamvada Devi
Krishna Kumari as Padmavathi Devi
Mikkilineni as Dharmapala Maharaju
Satyanarayana as Prachanda Sena
Thyagaraju as Simhabala
Balakrishna as Gangulu
K. V. Chalam
Jagga Rao
Vijaya Lalitha as Manjuvani
Chaya Devi as Amaravathi
Meena Kumari as Madanam
Rajeswari


== Soundtrack ==

Music composed by T. V. Raju.


== References ==


== External links ==
Chikkadu Dorakadu at IMDb