Careful What You Wish For is the sixth album by Scottish rock band Texas, released 20 October 2003. Released on the backdrop of their 2000 compilation album The Greatest Hits which had sold over four million copies internationally by the time Careful What You Wish For was released, it spawned two singles, the commercial successful "Carnival Girl", featuring Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall, and the second single, "I'll See It Through", which failed to match the success of "Carnival Girl". 
Due to the lack of commercial success of the second single "I'll See It Through", record label, Mercury Records, decided not to release a third single from the album, prompting the band to re–enter the recording studio to begin work on what would be their next album, 2005's Red Book. The album went on to achieve gold status in the UK for 100,000 copies sold, and achieved Gold certification in Switzerland for sales in excess of 20,000.


== Background ==
The recording sessions for Careful What You Wish For took place in recording studios located in London, Liverpool, Toronto, New York City and their home city Glasgow. Described as "most diverse & ambitious album to date" upon release in 2003, it features collaborations with Sun Cycle, pop producer and former The Buggles singer and bassist Trevor Horn, studio producer Kingbird, Ceri 'Sunship' Evans, songwriter Guy Chambers and Spike Stent. During the process of recording the album, Texas had recruited a new guitarist to join the band, and their first compilation album, The Greatest Hits (2000) had enjoyed major commercial success, selling more than five million copies internationally.
The albums artwork was noted for its dominance of lead singer Sharleen Spiteri, whilst the rest of the band members were omitted from the cover art. Careful What You Wish For was described as "a bit of a struggle" by Pop Rescue. It further commented that "it feels like there were some ideas for which direction Texas should head, and so they decided to try them all. The use of rappers in this Scottish pop-rock band just doesn’t work though, as bold as that might have been. Inevitably, it’s a mixed bag. A bumpy ride".
On the albums lead single "Carnival Girl", Texas collaborated with Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall. 


== Release and reception ==
Only two singles were produced from Careful What You Wish For. The first was the hit UK Top 10 single, "Carnival Girl" which reached #9 on the UK Singles Charts and was also a hit in other European countries.
A second single, "I'll See It Through" was released in December 2003. However, the single was less successful than the release of "Carnival Girl", only debuting at #40 on the UK Singles Charts. After this their record label, Mercury Records, decided not to release a third single from the album, and this led Texas to re-enter the studio to start work on their next album, Red Book (2005).


== Commercial performance ==
In their native Scotland, Careful What You Wish For debuted at number four on the Scottish Albums Charts, whereas in the United Kingdom, it debuted at number five on the UK Albums Charts. During its initial period of release, it spent only four weeks on the UK Albums Chart, last appearing at number seventy-four on week ending 22 November 2003, before re–entering the UK Top 100 at number eighty-three on week ending 13 December 2003. It would spend another four weeks on the chart during its re–entry period, spending a combined total of eight weeks within the UK Top 100. In France, it debuted at number five on the French Albums Charts, and spent a total of fifteen weeks on the albums charts in France.
Elsewhere across Europe, it reached number six in Switzerland, and spent a total of six weeks on the Swiss Albums Charts, number twenty-five in Germany, spending three weeks on the German Albums Charts, and debuted at number forty-six in Austria, spending three weeks on the Austrian Albums Charts. In the Wallonia region of Belgium, it reached number seven on the Ultratip Wallonia Albums Charts and spent thirteen weeks on the chart, whereas in the Flanders region of Belgium, it debuted at number ten, spending a combined total of seventeen weeks on the Flanders charts. It peaked within the Top 40 of the albums charts in Sweden, Norway and Denmark, charting at number twenty-eight, thirty-five and twenty-three respectively. It was less successful in the Netherlands, where it spent only one week on the Dutch Albums Charts following a debut appearance at number eighty-eight. 
It received Gold certification in both Switzerland and the United Kingdom. In Switzerland, it sold in excess of 20,000 copies, and in excess of 100,000 copies in the United Kingdom.


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Texas

Sharleen Spiteri –  vocals, guitar, piano, keyboards
Ally McErlaine –  guitar
Johnny McElhone –  guitar, bass, piano, keyboards
Tony McGovern –  guitar, vocals
Eddie Campbell –  piano, keyboards
Neil Payne –  drums (track 3)
Production

Tim Young – mastering
Johnny Mac – producer


== Chart positions ==


== Certifications and sales ==


== References ==