The East Hants Penguins are a Junior ice hockey team from East Hants, Nova Scotia, Canada.  The Penguins play in the Nova Scotia Junior Hockey League and are the 2007 Don Johnson Cup Maritime Junior B Champions.


== History ==
The Penguins were founded in 2000, but East Hants has a history that dates back decades in junior hockey.
In 2007, the Penguins won their first league title and went on to the Don Johnson Cup Maritime Junior B Championships.  They defeated the host Cumberland County Blues 7–2, Central West Junior Hockey League's Central Jr. Cataracts 11–2, New Brunswick's Madawaska 506 who played in Quebec all season 12–4, and the Island Junior Hockey League's Kensington Vipers 6–5 in overtime to finish first in the tournament round robin with a 4–0–0 record.  In the semi-final, the Penguins again crushed Central 8–3 and in the final they defeated Cumberland County 2–0 to win their first and only Don Johnson Cup.
In 2011–12, the Penguins finished second place in the regular season with a 24–8–2 record.  They would go on to win the league playoff championship.  At the 2012 Don Johnson Cup in St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, the Penguins would finish the round robin with a record of three wins and one loss.  The Penguins started the tournament with a 9–0 drubbing of the St. John's Junior Hockey League's Mount Pearl Jr. Blades.  Next, the Penguins beat the New Brunswick Junior B Hockey League's Moncton Vito's 5–2.  In the third game, the Penguins would win 3–2 in overtime to remain perfect, beating the Island Junior Hockey League's Kensington Vipers.  In the final game of the round robin, the Penguins would face the also undefeated host St. John's Jr. Caps.  The Jr. Caps won the game 3–2.  In the semi-finals, the Penguins defeated the Kensington Vipers again 2–1.  The Moncton Vito's upset the St. John's Jr. Caps in the other semi-final and were set to play the Penguins in the final.  The final went to overtime and the Vito's prevailed with a 2–1 victory.


== Season-by-season record ==


== Don Johnson Cup ==
Eastern Canada Jr B Championships


== External links ==
East Hants Junior Penguins