Mahaguru is a 1985 Indian Hindi-language action film directed by S. S. Ravichandra starring Rajinikanth, Meenakshi Sheshadri in lead roles. It was notable as the only film in which Meenakshi Sheshadri was paired opposite Rajinikanth and for its witty dialogues written by Kader Khan. The film was dubbed into Tamil as Raja Guru.


== Plot ==
Naagraj Darbari (Kader Khan) and his associate Shyam Kumar Talwari (Shafi Inamdar) rule over a small community in India with an iron hand. When former military officer, Subhash (Rakesh Roshan), comes home to his mother and sister, he is appalled at the conditions that the community is living in, and decides to do everything possible to improve their lot. This gets him in the bad books of Darbari and Talwari, who recruit a hit-man named Mahaguru (Rajinikanth) to deal with Subhash. Mahaguru confronts Subhash and severely beats him up, resulting in Subhash being crippled for life. Shortly thereafter, Mahaguru rescues Subhash's mother (Nirupa Roy) from some men who were molesting her. Village belle Basanti (Meenakshi Sheshadri), a close friend of Subhash, decides to have a go at turning Mahaguru around. She starts a friendship with him, finds out his name is really Vijay and he does respond positively and becomes attracted to her. This leaves Subhash free to assist the community, thus angering Darbari and Talwari all the more. They abduct Subhash and hold him prisoner, and then instruct Mahaguru to do away with him. Will Basanti's influence change Mahaguru? Or will he just act for anyone who gives him money?


== Cast ==
Rajnikanth as Vijay "Mahaguru"
Meenakshi Sheshadri as Basanti
Rakesh Roshan as Subhash
Nirupa Roy as Subhash's Mother
Gulshan Grover as Girikar (Naagraj's Nephew)
Kader Khan as Naagraj Darbari
Shafi Inamdar as Shyam Kumar Talwari
Shubha Khote as Chanda Talwari
Anuradha in Item number
Jeetendra as himself (in the song "Pyar Ka Khel" from a movie)
Sridevi as herself (in the song "Pyar Ka Khel" from a movie)


== Music ==
It had four hit Songs composed by Bappi Lahiri. All are written by Indeevar and sung by Asha Bhosle.


== References ==


== External links ==
Mahaguru at the Internet Movie Database