Ronald N. Drummond (born 1959 in Seattle, Washington) is a writer, editor, and independent scholar.


== Writer ==
Ron Drummond is the author of "The Sonic Rituals of Pauline Oliveros"; "The Frequency of Liberation", a critical fiction about the novels of Steve Erickson; "Ducré in Euphonia: Ideal and Influence in Berlioz"; "Broken Seashells", an essay/meditation on ancestral memory and the music of Jethro Tull; and the introductory essays for the 8-volume edition in score and parts of The Vienna String Quartets of Anton Reicha; and other essays, fictions, poems, reviews, and interviews. More recent publications include a short story, "Troll," published in Black Clock, and a performance essay on the Tokyo String Quartet.


== Editor ==
As an editor, Drummond worked with the novelist and critic Samuel R. Delany on the essay collections The Straits of Messina (1989), Longer Views (1996), the novel They Fly at Çiron (1993), collection Atlantis: Three Tales (1995), a novel-in-progress, Shoat Rumblin (2002), and Dark Reflections (2007); he was the publisher of Çiron and Atlantis. Drummond is also a proofreader and editorial redactor of Delany's most famous novel, Dhalgren (Bantam Books, 1974; Wesleyan University Press, 1996; Vintage Books, 2001). Delany wrote, "Ron's editorial acumen is the highest I have encountered in a professional writing career of more than thirty years." In March 2006, Drummond gave a talk on "Editing Samuel R. Delany" at an international academic conference on Delany's life and work held at SUNY Buffalo.
Drummond also worked with novelist John Crowley, publishing Crowley's short story collection Antiquities (1993), editing the novels Dæmonomania (2000) and Endless Things (2007), and the electronic versions of Ægypt and Love & Sleep (ElectricStory.com, 2002). He sold subscriptions for a deluxe 25th anniversary edition [5] of Crowley's 1981 novel Little, Big , slated for publication in 2007, and finally published in October 2022.


== Designer ==
From September 2002 through June 2003, Drummond created an original design for the World Trade Center Memorial called 'A Garden Stepping into the Sky'. The design was the focus of a documentary by independent filmmaker Gregg Lachow and was featured on CNN.com and Seattle's KOMO-TV News.


== See also ==

Albacon


== References ==


== External links ==

Dreaming of Dao Gaia
Lunar Sacrament
Broken Seashells
The Sonic Rituals of Pauline Oliveros
The Frequency of Liberation
No Royal Directive: Joseph Haydn and the String Quartet
Jupiter in the Age of Enlightenment
Aperçu of Apotheosis Beethoven dancing
Czech Classicism: The Sweat of the Brow
The String Quartets of Anton Reicha
Anton Reicha: A Biographical Sketch
On First Hearing the Stochastic Kaleidophon of Carter Scholz
The Dumpster Concerto
Merton Music String Chamber Music Catalog 2006/2007
The 25th Anniversary Edition of John Crowley's Little, Big