Domino Suzy Kirke-Badgley Kirke; born 17 December 1983 is a British-American singer.


== Early life and education ==
Kirke is named after Domino Harvey, whom her mother met when Harvey was a young girl. The Kirke family is a junior branch of a family of Nottinghamshire landed gentry and descends also from the Gibson-Craig baronets. Kirke's maternal grandmother was Israeli/Jewish. Her maternal grandfather was property investor Jack Dellal.
Kirke sang in choirs and started taking piano lessons from the age of six. Started writing music when she was about eleven, and always had recording studios in her home growing up due to her dad being a musician.  Her father is Simon Kirke, the drummer for Free and Bad Company. Kirke then attended Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School and studied classical voice and piano.
Her mother Lorraine ran the Geminola boutique. Kirke has two younger sisters  Lola Kirke and Jemima Kirke. 


== Career ==
After being spotted at a Joe's Pub performance at age 17 by producer Andres Levin, Kirke was signed to his label, Fun Machine. Shortly thereafter, she joined forces with Jordan Galland, and formed the band DOMINO, which recorded an EP with Mark Ronson and toured for three years with the likes of Gang of Four and Lily Allen. The band was also featured in Lena Dunham's indie movie Tiny Furniture. The video for their song "Green Umbrella", directed by Galland, won Best Musical Form at the 2006 Da Vinci Film and Video Festival.
In 2017Kirke released her first solo EP called “Beyond Waves”. In 2021 she released an emotional single called “Mercy” about her miscarriage.
Domino became a birth doula around 2009 and co-founded a doula business collective, Carriage House Birth. And founded the Grand-street healing project.  In November 2021, along with entrepreneur Joanna Griffiths, Kirke released Life After Birth: Portraits of Love and the Beauty of Parenthood, a book about the experiences of postpartum mothers.


== Personal life ==
In 2009, Kirke gave birth to a son with musician Morgan O'Kane.
In 2014, she began a relationship with actor and musician Penn Badgley. They married in a New York courthouse on 27 February 2017. In February 2020, Kirke and Badgley announced they were expecting their first child together after suffering two miscarriages. Their son was born in August 2020.


== Discography ==
Everyone Else Is Boring EP (2006)
Mark Ronson Presents Hard Rock compilation (2007)
Adults Only (2010)
The Guard EP (2012)
Beyond Waves (2017)


== References ==