Magarat is It was settled and inhabited by Magars, one of the largest indigenous ethnic groups of Nepal. It is a geographical cluster in Nepal that existed in the modern territory of Nepal before the Unification of Nepal. It extended from the Budhi Gandaki River the West.
Palpa district and Rolpa district of Nepal (majority of Kham Magars), both located in Province 5 of Nepal, are the top two districts of Nepal with the highest indigenous Magar population.


== Magars ==
Magars are martial people who first established their kingdom in present-day western Nepal. They were animistic and shamanic in their religious practices. The Kham Magar of the upper Karnali basin and their brethren of the mid-hills of Nepal had a flourishing kingdom. Archaeological proof of their existence can be found in the western mid-hills of Nepal. The Magar have a strong military and warrior tradition. However, their hospitality and concern for their fellow human beings is legendary. Two waves of immigrants became the undoing of the Magar empire. Firstly, the Khasas were welcomed and assimilated. Due to the advance of Muslim forces into the Gangetic plains, Brahmins entered Magarat as refugees. These two groups were given sanctuary. The latter group started to impose their view of Hinduism upon the Magars, while the former group was given the status of Chhetri by the Brahmins in accordance with their view of Hinduism. This left the Magar people in the third tier in the kingdom (following the Brahmins and in second place and the Chettri (previously Khasas)as first). This meant that the one-time rulers of the Nepali mid-hills became the ruled. The introduction of Hinduism in itself became the cataclysmic event in the undoing of the Magar empire.


== Aramudi ==
Aramudi is a name of a legend in the 8th century Himalayan history, particularly of Kashmir and Nepal. In a war between King Aramudi and Kashmir (King Jayapida), the Kashmir king was defeated and imprisoned in a fortress built above the bank of Kali Gandaki river is called Kalhana aśma-veśman " (stone house) in present Gulmi district. Aramudi was also called king Baradev of ancient Nepal. Lalitpattan, presently Lalitpur, was his capital.


=== Etymology ===
Aramudi sounds like an indigenous Magar name with ‘di’ suggesting – ‘water’ or ‘river’. The four morphemes or segments ‘a’ + ‘ra’ + ‘mu’ + di’ or ‘mo + di’. Conjugating these morphemes produces either “aramu + di” or “ara’ + ‘mudi or modi”. In Magar ‘aramu’ or ‘armu’ means ‘sweet smell’ and ‘di’ means ‘water’ - hence literally “aramu + di” means ‘sweet smelling water’ or ‘sweet tasting spring water', in Nepali ‘jharanako mitho pani’. The ‘di’ in ‘Aramudi’ is suggestive of ‘water’ in Magar. In the Kali Gandaki region and western Nepal, rivers, small streams, towns and villages retain their Magar language names. Examples include Marshyang+di river in Tanahu, ‘Lang+di’, ‘Darang+di’; ’Lun+di’ in Gorkha, ‘Hosrang+di’ village in Parbat, Chhang+di in Tanahu, ‘Argaun+di’ village, ‘Hug+di’ in Plapa district. During the period of Magarat ( Confideration of Twelve Magarat & Eighteen Magarat ) In the kingdom called Palpa the King was ‘ Mukunda Sen Magar” in Naradsmriti Granth. He waged a war against Nepal [KathmanduValley] twice in 1521 Bikram Era and on Chaitra 11,1522 BE.


== Mansingh Khadka Magar ==
Mansingh Khadka Magar was a king of Majhakot and Uppalokot in Gorkha until 1559. At an annual running event called Liglig Daud, the winner was chosen King Of Ligligkot Kingdom Dravya Shah (youngest son Of Yashobrahma) was invited to take over the throne by the Brahmins, in particular Bhagirath Panth and Ganesh Pande. On the 8th of Bhadon Badi, Saka 1481 (A.D. 1559) Dravya Shah was aided by Bhagirath Panth, Ganesa Pande, Busal Arjyal, Khanal Bohra, Murli Khawas and Gangaram Rana Magar of Liglig-kot. Ganesa Pande had collected all the people of Gurkha, such as the Thapas, Busals, Ranas and Maski Ranas of the Magar tribe, they went by the Dahya Gauda route and attacked the Durbar and defeated the Khadka Raja (Khadka a sub-clan of Rana Magar clan's).                                                                                                                           As Dravya Shah took his seat on the gaddi and named the new Gorkha Kingdom, Dravya Shah used the army of the Khas Thakuri and Magars to invade neighboring states. His successors continued this aggression to increase the territory belonging to Gorkha.
Kingdoms such as Rishing, Ghiring, Argha, Khachhi, Gulmi, Dhor, Satung, Paiung, Bhirkot, Gharung Mishikot, Isma were collectively known as Barha Magarat or Confederation of Twelve Magar Kingdoms and were ruled by Magar Kings. 
The annual festival of Barhakune Tal in Ghorahi of Dang district commemorates the founding of Twelve Magarats Confederation of Twelve Magar Kingdoms. Similarly Athara Magarat or Confederation of Eighteen Magar Kingdoms was located west of Kali Gandaki, primarily inhabited by Kham Magars.


== References ==