Mahrang Baloch (Urdu: ماہ رنگ بلوچ; Balochi: مهرنگ بلۏچ) is a Pakistani human rights activist against alleged enforced disappearances, extrajudicial killings, and other human rights abuses in Balochistan. Mahrang leads the Baloch Yakjehti Committee ("Baloch Unity Committee", BYC), a human rights movement based in Balochistan. On 28 July 2024, she was part of the Baloch Raji Muchi ("Baloch National Gathering") in Gwadar, an event aimed at uniting the Baloch against these abuses.


== Biography ==
Mahrang was born in 1993 into a Baloch family.  Her father Abdul Gaffar Langove was an activist who raised his voice against humans rights violations in Pakistan.


== Activism ==
On 12 December 2009, her father was abducted by Pakistan security forces on his way to the hospital in Karachi but later released. At the age of 16, she immediately started protesting his abduction and became known in the student resistance movement. In July 2011, her father was abducted again and found dead with signs of torture. 
Her brother was later abducted by the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) in December 2017 and later released after. Since then, she has been one of the prominent figure in the Baloch resistance movement.  
She has protested the government's extraction of natural resources from Balochistan. In 2020, she led a group of students protesting the proposed removal of the quota system at Bolan Medical College, which reserves spots for medical students from remote areas of the province. As a result of the group's activism and hunger strikes, the proposed policy change was cancelled.
Mahrang Baloch has gained international support from prominent figures, including climate activist Greta Thunberg, who expressed her solidarity by tweeting, "Climate justice activists worldwide stand with @MahrangBaloch_ and other peaceful protesters who have been detained, tortured, and harassed by Islamabad police for speaking out against human rights violations in Balochistan. #MarchAgainstBalochGenocide." This show of support came during the long march from Turbat to Islamabad, when Baloch women faced intense repression from state forces.
Similarly, Nobel Peace Prize laureate Malala Yousafzai voiced her backing, tweeting, "I stand with my Baloch sisters who are demanding accountability for enforced disappearances. Peaceful protest is their right, and their voices must be heard."


== Recent developments ==


=== 2023 Baloch Long March ===

The Baloch Long March was a protest movement led by Mahrang Baloch and other Baloch women activists from the BYC, journeying from Turbat to Islamabad, to protest human rights violations and enforced disappearances in Balochistan. According to the BYC, the protestors were abducted by the ISI, and detained by Islamabad Police. Later a bail was approved that resulted in release of some participants, though many were missing as per media reports and lawyers.


=== 2024 Time Magazine Recognition and Travel Ban ===
In October 2024, Time (magazine) named Mahrang as one of the 100 emerging influential leaders of the year, recognising her extraordinary courage in opposing state oppression and her relentless advocacy against enforced disappearances and human rights violations in Balochistan. However, she was barred from traveling to New York City for a Time event and faced harassment at the airport. While returning home with Sammi Baloch, she was further harassed by FIA officials, and plainclothes officers confiscated her passport and mobile phone, attempting to abduct them. According to her lawyer, it was discovered that the Government of Pakistan had quietly added her to the Pakistan National Identity List (PNIL), a registry for individuals suspected of involvement in criminal activities such as terrorism, money laundering, and fraud - just days after she appeared on Time's influential list on 3 October. In response, the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan called for "freedom of movement" for Mahrang, while UN Special Rapporteur on Human Rights Defender Mary Lawlor, expressed deep concern on social media about the incident, citing reports of "harassment, intimidation and mistreatment".


==== Political Harassment ====
On 11 October 2024, just days after Mahrang Baloch was barred from traveling abroad, an Anti-Terrorism case was filed against her in the Malir district of Qaidabad by a local businessman. The complainant in the First information report (FIR) accused Mahrang of "inciting violence in his area" despite the Quaidabad Station House Officer (SHO) being unable to confirm any such activities by Mahrang Baloch and her colleagues.  Baloch dismissed the charges as fabricated, attributing the case to "the state's discomfort with her activism", and stated that such FIRs aim to intimidate those involved in their collective struggle.


== Awards ==
In December 2024, Marang Baloch was included on the BBC's 100 Women list.


== References ==


== External Link ==
Short Deutsche Welle documentary on Mahrang Baloch [1]