Ryan Hall (born March 9, 1994), known as Ryan Hall, Y’all, is an American YouTuber, TikToker, and an Internet personality. As of June 17, 2024, Hall has accumulated over 1.8 million followers on TikTok. On his primary YouTube channel, Hall currently has over 2 million subscribers and over 231 million views. Hall has a secondary YouTube channel, "Ryan Hall, Y'all XTRA," that currently has over 748,000 subscribers and over 107 million views. Hall also has a tertiary YouTube channel "The Y'all Squad" that currently has over 40,000 subscribers.


== Early life and education ==
Hall was born in Pikeville, Kentucky, and went to Mississippi State University to pursue broadcast meteorology, while working at WYMT-TV.  However, Hall chose to leave his degree program and WYMT-TV to work more in the field.


== YouTube career ==
Ryan Hall was initially active in 2017 through 2020 making YouTube videos as "RKHTV" involving vaping, helping people switch from traditional cigarettes to the alternative of vaping. Hall, from his vape shop Mountain Vapors in Pikeville, KY reviewed vape products and juices alongside a crew of his friends. The channel still exists under the name of "The Bullz", where Ryan Hall and friends amassed over 500k subscribers, but it is unknown if Hall is still affiliated. After separating himself from the channel due to YouTube's crackdown on vaping content Hall proceeded to continue creating content such as "TikTok News" on TikTok. 
Despite his background and interest in meteorology, Ryan did not post his first weather video on the platform until January 4, 2021. He livestreamed for the first time in early March 2021, and would draw his first large live audience while livestreaming a tornado outbreak on March 17, 2021. Broadcasting his screen set to multiple paid radar subscription programs, Hall managed to inform and alert viewers on the live locations and impacts of the storms, while explaining safety measures and courses of action for the people to follow. A recurrent format on his channel, his streams have helped his channel grow and reach thousands of people in the path of severe weather, with the help of resharing and forwarding of his videos and broadcasts on social media. Other types of content he uploads include forecasts of upcoming weather, and storm chasing footage. Throughout his YouTube career, Hall has done collaborations with extreme meteorologist and storm chaser Reed Timmer as well as other storm chasers.
In addition to working with storm chasers, Hall has assembled a large team to help him produce weather content. This includes Andy Hill, a degreed meteorologist who began working with Ryan in March 2022.


== Controversies ==
In November 2022, Kim Klockow McClain, a meteorologist and team lead at the Behavioral Insights Unit at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) said, “while the jury is still out on exactly how viewers receive YouTube thumbnails, research suggests if people do fixate on the thumbnails, it could pose a problem.”


== Charitable work ==
In March 2023, Hall's subscribers raised $120,000 to help victims of the Rolling Fork and Amory, Mississippi tornadoes, along with supplies and meals. In the following months, Hall established "The Y'all Squad", a 501 (c)(3) non-profit organization to provide relief to storm victims. Hall also created a third YouTube channel "The Y'all Squad" for his non-profit; here he periodically releases content showing how donations have been used to help victims affected by natural disasters. In May 2024, Hall's subscribers raised $93,000 after an EF4 tornado hit the town of Greenfield, Iowa. "The Y'all Squad" was able to help storm victims with supplies and meals hours after the tornado struck the town.


== Personal life ==
Hall currently lives in Pikeville, Kentucky, with his wife, Stephanie Thacker Hall. The couple married in 2019, and they have two children.


== References ==