Libo County (simplified Chinese: 荔波县; traditional Chinese: 荔波縣; pinyin: Lìbō Xiàn) is a county of southern Guizhou province, China, bordering Guangxi to the south. It is under the administration of the Qiannan Buyei and Miao Autonomous Prefecture.


== Geography ==
The county is located in the remote southeastern corner of the prefecture, on the border with Guangxi. Two local sites, Xiaoqikong (小七孔) and Dongduo (洞多), notable for their spectacular karst formations, form part of the multi-site South China Karst UNESCO World Heritage Site inscribed in 2007, which is an area about 550,000 km2 in extent.


== Administrative divisions ==
Libo County is divided into 1 subdistrict, 5 towns and 2 ethnic township:

subdistrict
Yuping Subdistrict 玉屏街道
towns
Chaoyang Town 朝阳镇
Maolan Town 茂兰镇
Jialiang Town 甲良镇
Jiarong Town 佳荣镇
Xiaoqikong Town 小七孔镇
ethnic townships
Yaoshan Yao Ethnic Township 瑶山瑶族乡
Limingguan Shui Ethnic Township 黎明关水族乡


== Languages ==
Southwestern Mandarin, Mak, Ai-Cham, Bouyei, Sui, and Numao are spoken in Libo County. Sui is spoken primarily in Shuiyao Shui Ethnic Township 水尧水族乡.


== Transportation ==
The Qiannan Libo Airport, opened in late 2007, has capacity to receive planes of the Boeing 737 class, and to handle up to  220,000 passengers annually. However, the $57-million facility is rather underutilized so far. According to the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC) statistics, 151 paying passengers flew into or out of the airport in 2009 - which was a 98% drop compared to the previous year (7886 passengers), and placed the airport the last in list of the nation's 166 airports by traffic volume. Currently four airlines use the airport.


== Flora ==
The karst environments in Libo County consist of the following types of forests.

Warm coniferous forest
Pinus kwangtungensis forest
Warm needle and broad-leaved mixed forest
Pseudotsuga sinensis, Platycarya longipes mixed forest
Pseudotsuga sinensis, Pinus kwangtungensis, Quercus phillyraeoides mixed forest
Evergreen and deciduous broad-leaved mixed forest
Cyclobalanopsis glauca, Platycarya longipes mixed forest
Platycarya longipes, Phellodendron amurense mixed forest
Platycarya longipes, Viburnum mixed forest
Handeliodendron bodinieri, Acer mixed forest
Viburnum, Heptapleurum heptaphyllum mixed forest
Sterculiaceae, Cyclobalanopsis glauca mixed forest
Taxus cuspidata, Lindera mixed forest
Koelreuteria paniculata, Aceraceae mixed forest
Castanopsis fargesii, Elaeocarpaceae mixed forest
Big-cluster bamboo forest
Dendrocalamus tsiangii forest
Common angiosperm genera include Beilschmiedia, Cryptocarya, Casearia, Diospyros, Pittosporum, Acer, Carpinus, Ulmus, Viburnum, Prunus, and Rosa. Protected wild plants in Libo County include Handeliodendron bodinieri, Mussaenda anomala, Taxus chinensis, Paphiopedilum emersonii, Paphiopedilum barbigerum and Paphiopedilum micranthum, Pinus kwangtungensis, Pseudotsuga sinensis, Pseudotsuga brevifolia, Calocedrus macrolepis, Tetrathyrium subcordatum, Trachycarpus nana, Emmenopterys henryi, Liriodendron chinense.


== Climate ==


== References ==