Scanner Cop is a 1994 science fiction action horror film. It is the fourth film in the Scanners series and the first of two films in the Scanner Cop sub-series. It is written, produced, and directed by longtime series producer Pierre David, and stars Daniel Quinn, Darlanne Fluegel, Mark Rolston and Richard Lynch. It was released direct-to-video in March 1994.


== Plot ==
A scanner goes crazy and is shot by officer Pete Harrigan (Richard Grove). Harrigan discovers the scanner had a child and adopts him. 15 years later Harrigan is now the leader of the LAPD and the child, Sam Staziak (Daniel Quinn), is a rookie cop with the same Los Angeles Police Department.
Staziak is also a 'Scanner' (a person born with telepathic and telekinetic abilities), although he keeps the powers hidden. Dr. Karl Glock (Richard Lynch) is a psychiatrist who is using a cult he leads to brainwash individuals to kill police.
As the string of murders begins to decimate the police department, Sam faces sensory overload and possible insanity as he reluctantly uses his powers to hunt the man responsible for the killings.
Sam scans the memories of a coroner (Gary Hudson) who committed suicide, providing clues to find Glock. Police psychiatrist Dr Arden discovers puncture marks. indicating those who have been killing officers were drugged. A scan by Sam of a wife who killed her police officer husband shows the drug makes the victim see a giant version of whatever phobia they have.
Glock traps Sam, but Sam escapes. Sam attempts to scan Glock but is blocked by a metal plate in Glock's head. Glock attempts to pose as Harrigan's surgeon, but Sam scans the plate out of Glock's head, killing him.


== Cast ==
Daniel Quinn as Samuel Staziak
Richad Grove as Commander Peter Harrigan
Darlanne Fluegel as Dr. Joan Alden
Mark Rolston as Lieutenant Harry Brown
Richard Lynch as Karl Glock
Hilary Shepard as Zena
Luca Bercovici as Dr. Krench
Gary Hudson as Damon Pratt
Savannah Smith Boucher as Margaret Harrigan
Cyndi Pass as Sarah Kopek
Ben Reed as Rick Kopek
Billy Williams as Eightball
Wayne Grace as Officer Dooley
Darren Dalton as Officer Longo


== Production ==
The film was the directorial debut of Pierre David, whom had produced the first three Scanners films as well as David Cronenberg's Videodrome.
Unlike the previous films, which were all shot in Canada, Scanner Cop was shot in the United States with an American cast. Filming took place in Los Angeles.


== Release ==
The film was released on VHS and LaserDisc by Republic Pictures. A DVD has been released in Canada, along with the sequel Scanners: The Showdown (also known as Scanner Cop 2).
The film along with Scanners: The Showdown was released on 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray from Vinegar Syndrome in a double feature set on May 28, 2021.


== Reception ==
Empire rated it 2/5 stars and described it as a "moderately enjoyable horror movie, that suffers for its cast and script".  TV Guide rated it 2/4 stars and wrote that the film "works as a solid exploitation item", though it criticized the police procedural aspects.   Glenn Kenny of Entertainment Weekly, in an article critiquing recent direct-to-video releases, rated it D+ and called the plot an excuse for "gruesome special effects".
Writing for Bloody Disgusting, Daniel Baldwin praised the film for taking the Scanners series in a new direction, describing it as "a tightly-written and paced cop thriller". Moira gave the film two stars, found it not a dire as the other films in the franchise, and it was competently made but otherwise found it pedestrian.
TV Guide found that the movie depends a bit too much on the police procedural portion of the plot, but overall the movie is intriguing and works as a solid exploitation movie. It did note that Glock should have been given more screen time


== Sequel ==
Scanner Cop II Volkin's Revenge, also known as  Scanners: The Showdown, was released in 1995.


== References ==


== External links ==
Scanner Cop at IMDb