The Commercial Spaceflight Federation is a private spaceflight industry group, incorporated as an industry association for the purposes of establishing ever higher levels of safety for the commercial human spaceflight industry, sharing best practices and expertise, and promoting the growth of the industry worldwide.  Issues that the Commercial Spaceflight Federation works on include, but are not limited to, airspace issues, FAA regulations and permits, industry safety standards, public outreach, and public advocacy for the commercial space sector.


== History ==
In 2005, Peter Diamandis and John Gedmark from the X Prize Foundation convened a group of leaders in the emerging personal spaceflight industry, held at SpaceX's headquarters in El Segundo, California. Attendees at the meeting included SpaceX CEO Elon Musk, Virgin Galactic's Alex Tai, aviation pioneer Burt Rutan, businessman Robert Bigelow, and entrepreneur John Carmack. The goal of what was then called the Personal Spaceflight Federation was to "design and uphold the standards and processes necessary to ensure public safety and promote growth of the personal spaceflight industry."
On August 22, 2006, the PSF laid out their priorities as:

Member Coordination
Government Interface
Both with Congress and other federal agencies in order "to develop a legal and regulatory environment supportive of the growth of the human spaceflight industry."
Safety in spaceport operations, crew and passenger training, and vehicle manufacture, operations, and maintenance
Safety was highlighted as the most important concern for the PSF because safety was the common link between all the member companies
Insurance
Public Relations
On June 15, 2008, the Personal Spaceflight Federation announced a new website and a new name—the Commercial Spaceflight Federation—to emphasize "the diverse business activities of the commercial human spaceflight industry."  The areas the CSF now represented include:

Cargo and crew to the International Space Station
Flight of private individuals (space tourism)
Science Research Missions
Technology Research and Development
Astronaut training
Education and Outreach Activities
National Security Applications
On August 10, 2009, CSF announced the creation of the Suborbital Applications Research Group (SARG). On February 18, 2010, the CSF announced a new research and education affiliates program.
United Launch Alliance joined in 2010, followed by Boeing's membership in 2013, but both left by 2014. The X Prize Foundation left by around 2016.
CSF has hosted the CST Commercial Space Transportation Conference in partnership with the FAA since 2017.


== Lobbying efforts ==
The Commercial Spaceflight Federation lobbied for passage of the 2015 Commercial Space Bill.
Former Commercial Spaceflight Federation President Eric Stallmer testified before the Senate Subcommittee on Science, Space, and Competitiveness on February 24, 2015
Former CSF President Eric Stallmer testified alongside Elliot Pullham, CEO of the Space Foundation at a House Science, Space and Technology hearing on April 19, 2016
CSF opposed the sale of excess ICBMs for use in space launch.
Eric Stallmer testified for the House's Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee in a hearing titled "The ISS After 2024: Options and Impacts." on March 22, 2017 
The Commercial Spaceflight Federation hosted a cocktail party for members of the National Space Council, including Vice President Pence, in February 2018.
A week before the 50th anniversary of Apollo 11, Eric Stallmer testified before the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee with Apollo 11 & 13 flight director Gene Kranz, former NASA engineer and author of Rocket Boys, Homer Hickam, former NASA mathematician Christine Darden, and CEO of the Coalition for Deep Space Exploration Mary Lynne Dittmar on July 9, 2019 
Eric Stallmer testified before the House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee in a hearing on NASA's ISS plans on July 10, 2019 
Karina Drees testified before the Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee titled "Space Situational Awareness, Space Traffic Management, and Orbital Debris: Examining Solutions for Emerging Threats" on July 22, 2021.
Karina Drees testified before the House Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee in a hearing titled "Continuing U.S. Leadership in Commercial Space at Home and Abroad" on July 13, 2023.


== Committees and Working Groups ==
The Commercial Spaceflight Federation has two organizing committees as well as several working groups composed of their members and staff that are working to address the most pressing issues facing the industry. Participation in these committees is open to Executive and Associate members.


=== Legislative ===
The Legislative Committee works to secure funding for civil space activities, NASA, the Office of Space Commerce, and FAA's Office of Commercial Space Transportation (AST). Additionally, it seeks to work with congressional offices and committees to implement programmatic and language requests that establish and benefit programs that utilize commercial industry.


=== Regulatory ===
CSF's Regulatory Committee collaborates to prepare information for and present a united position to regulators across the USG, ensuring that regulation does not needlessly hinder the advancement of the commercial space industry. To this end, the Regulatory Committee ensures that commercial perspectives are included in the regulation and standards development process to ensure the safety of spaceflight participants and provide the FAA and FCC with means of compliance.
The Committee also works with industry experts from a variety of government agencies (including The Departments of State and Commerce) to promote modernization of Export Control policy and procedures in regards to the commercial space industry. The committee aims to assist American companies to remain competitive leaders in the global market and to advance innovation and technology overall. The committee also serves as a point of reference for adherence to current legislation and policy.


=== Spaceports ===
The Commercial Spaceflight Federation's Spaceports Working Group focuses on a wide variety of issues facing the spaceport community including environmental, infrastructure, and regulatory topics, as well as seeking to encourage and fund programs to support spaceports.


== Membership ==
CSF members are responsible for the creation of thousands of high-tech jobs. Members include over 85 industry organizations involved in commercial spaceflight and private spaceflight, often referred to as new space.
There are four tiers of CSF membership, with each having different requirements and perks. The highest tier is Executive Membership, which is generally reserved for commercial spaceflight developers, operators, and spaceports. Below Executive members are Associate Members, which is composed of suppliers supporting commercial spaceflight, with recent members including suppliers of mission support services and suppliers of training, medical and life-support products and services. The third tier of membership is called Research and Education Affiliates (REM for short), and this tier is occupied by Universities, educational and student nonprofits, and other research and education institutions. The fourth tier of CSF membership is the Patrons Program. This tier is distinct from the rest in the sense that it is composed of individuals rather than corporate entities.


=== Executive Members ===
Executive Membership is the highest level of membership offered at the Commercial Spaceflight Federation. At this level, members have an exclusive seat on the CSF Board of Directors.


==== Current List of Executive Members ====
(Updated November 30, 2024):

Arizona State University
Axiom Space
Blue Origin
Cecil Field Spaceport (Jacksonville)
ISS National Laboratory
Maxar Technologies
Midland International Air & Space Port
Planet
Redwire
Relativity Space
Rocket Lab
Sierra Space
Southwest Research Institute
Space Florida
Stoke Space
SpaceX
Virgin Galactic
Voyager Space Holdings
World View Enterprises


=== Associate Members ===
The second highest tier, Associate members are invited to participate on CSF committees and working groups.


==== Current List of Associate Members ====
(Updated November 30, 2024):

Advanced Space
Aerostar
Aetherflux
Alaska Aerospace Corporation
Amazon (Kuiper Systems)
Astranis Space Technologies
Arctos
AST Space Mobile
Barrios Technology
Cesium Astro
Colorado Air and Space Port
COMSPOC
Firefly Aerospace
Gravitics
HawkEye 360
Houston Airport System
Interlune
ispace Inc.
Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
LeoLabs
Mead and Hunt
RS&H
Space Tango
Spaceport America
Titusville-Cocoa Airport Authority
Varda Space Industries
Vast


=== Research and Education Affiliates ===
The Research and Education Affiliates is primarily for "Researchers, engineers, and educators."


==== Current list of research and education affiliates ====
(Updated November 30, 2024):

American Society for Gravitational and Space Research
Association of Spaceflight Professionals
Baylor College of Medicine
Burrell College of Osteopathic Medicine
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
Florida Institute of Technology
Florida State University
The Museum of Flight
High Speed Flight
National Institute for Aviation Research
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
New Mexico State University
Purdue University
Silicon Valley Space Center
Sovaris Aerospace, LLC
Stanford Aeronautics & Astronautics
STARS at Carnegie Mellon
University of Arizona
University of Central Florida
University of Florida
University of North Dakota
University of Texas Medical Branch


=== Patrons Program ===
The Patron Program is unique in that it allows for individual membership, unlike other membership categories, which are reserved for corporations, and organizations.


== Suborbital Applications Researchers Group ==
The Suborbital Applications Researchers Group (SARG) was created on August 10, 2009, to "increase awareness of commercial suborbital vehicles in the science and R&D communities, to work with policymakers to ensure that payloads can have easy access to these vehicles, and to further develop ideas for the uses of these vehicles for science, engineering, and education missions."


== See also ==
NewSpace


== References ==


== External links ==
Commercial Spaceflight Federation Website