A Virtuous Business (Korean: 정숙한 세일즈) is a 2024 South Korean comedy drama television series written by Choi Bo-rim, directed by Jo Woong, and starring Kim So-yeon, Yeon Woo-jin, Kim Sung-ryung, Kim Sun-young, and Lee Se-hee. The series is a remake of the 2016 British television series Brief Encounters by Oriane Messina and Fay Rusling. Set in the 1990s and tells the story of women who make door-to-door sales about adult products. It aired on JTBC from October 12, to November 17, 2024, every Saturday and Sunday at 22:30 (KST). It is also available for streaming on Netflix in selected regions.


== Synopsis ==
A Virtuous Business follows the independence, growth, and friendship of the four Bangpan Sisters who jump into door-to-door sales of adult products in a rural village in 1992, a time when sex was still a taboo.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Kim So-yeon as Han Jeong-suk
A housewife who lives a virtuous life. She elected as the Geumje Chili Lady "Jin" with her bright beauty, married her husband, her first date, and led a modest and passive life. However, she is unable to buy her only son a new bag and worries about monthly rent arouses her. When she jumps into door-to-door sales of foreign adult products to make money on her own, she discovers the natural talent of a marketer she did not know she had.
Yeon Woo-jin as Kim Do-hyun
An American-style detective who lived in the United States. He grew up in a wealthy family and graduated from a prestigious Ivy League school, returns to Korea and is promoted quickly through special promotions at Gangnam Police Station but for some reason, he is transferred to Geumje Police Station.
Kim Sung-ryung as Oh Geum-hee
The elegant brain of the Bangpan Sisters. She graduated from Ewha Womans University who grew up well-mannered and called a lady back then. However, she is currently spending her free days in Geumje, the hometown of her husband whom she married through her family's arrangement.
Kim Sun-young as Seo Young-bok
A mother of four children who has a wonderful relationship with her husband. She jumps into door-to-door sales to somehow provide separate rooms for her children. She also plays the role of licorice that makes the Bangpan Sisters laugh by turning even extreme situations into humor.
Lee Se-hee as Lee Joo-ri
A single mother raising her son alone and Geum-je's "it girl". She runs a beauty salon and wins the hearts of men who send her sly glances for enjoying unconventional clothes with her smiling face and cute speech. At first, she enters door-to-door sales thinking that it is an interesting event in her boring daily life, but she grows up to become the brash youngest who wakes up her sisters with a lively fact bomber who is not frustrated under any circumstances.


=== Supporting ===
Kim Won-hae Choi Won-bong
Geum-hee's blunt kkondae husband, owner of the town pharmacy.
Choi Jae-rim as Kwon Seong-soo
Jeong-suk's unfaithful fighter husband.
Im Chul-soo as Park Jong-sun
Young-bok's loving but incompetent husband
Kang Ae-sim as Lee Bok-soon
Jeong-suk's mother
Seo Hyun-chul as Do-hyun's colleague

Jeong Soon-won Do-hyun's colleague

Kim Jung-jin as Eom Dae-geun
Son of a wealthy real estate agent who the townspeople can't stand, he has low self-esteem, works part-time at the town pharmacy and is very geeky, higly enthusiastic about the things he likes, and secretly a great photographer.
Park Ok-chul as a local supermarket owner

Park Ji-ah as a butcher shop owner

Kim Sun-mi as a rice shop owner

Joo In-young as Cheol-mul
A hardware store owner who is one of the Anti Sisters fighting against Bangpan Sisters.
Hong Ji-hee

Shim Wan-joon

Jeon Su-ji

Woo Hyun-joo as Jo Soon-ae

Jung Young-joo as Heo Young-ja
Owns a real estate agency, overbearing mother of Eom Dae-geun, who doesn't respect her son and thinks he's a failure. The one who led the Anti Sisters who is called Madam Bokdeokpang.


=== Special appearance ===
Ra Mi-ran as Kim Mi-ran
CEO of Fantasy Lingerie, a company that sells adult products door-to-door by Bangpan Sisters.


== Production ==
In March 2024, Kim So-yeon, Lee Se-hee, Kim Sung-ryung, and Kim Sun-young were reportedly cast as the four female leads of the series.
In May 2024, Yeon Woo-jin was reportedly cast as the male lead of the series.
In July 2024, the five actors were officially confirmed to lead the series. Directed by Jo Woong, written by Choi Bo-rim, provided by SLL, and co-produced by HighZium Studio and 221b.


== Release ==
JTBC announced that A Virtuous Business is scheduled to air in the second half of 2024. The series was confirmed to be broadcast on October 12, 2024, and would air every Saturday and Sunday. It is also available to stream on Netflix in selected regions.


== Viewership ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website  (in Korean)
A Virtuous Business at IMDb 
A Virtuous Business at HanCinema