Saboi Imboela (born 10 October 1977) is a Zambian politician who leads the National Democratic Congress, a Zambian opposition political party. Previously, she was a singer for the singing group Shatel in the late 90s and early 2000s.


== Early life and education ==
Imboela was born on 10 October 1977 to late Police Chief Edwin Imboela. She has a certificate in Journalism from Manfield College and a diploma in computer studies from ZAMIM. She later enrolled at University of London (Westlyn College) where she did law, sociology and English. She then went to the University of Zambia and commenced her full time study in Political Science and Development Studies. There, she graduated as the best student in her field and was later offered her a job as a tutor. In 2012, Saboi left the country for New Zealand to study at Canterbury University where she obtained her master's degree in International Law of Politics.
She also holds a Certificate in Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation from the University of Zambia and a Certificate in Diplomacy, Protocol and Public Relations from ZIDIS.


== Music career ==
In the late '90s, Imboela teamed up with long time friend Barbara Njovu and formed a music duo called Shatel. They first featured on Mondo Music's Rhythm Nation Project with a track called Niswalele in 2000. Prior to this, the duo performed at the Women in Music Talent Show in 1996 and at the International Conference for AIDS and STDs in Africa hosted in Lusaka. Through Shatel, they released several songs which hit the Zambian hit-weave in the early 2000s.
Shatel were the first Zambian artists, together with Maiko Zulu to be nominated for the Kora Awards in South Africa. Among the awards won, Shatel won the Sounds Arcades Best Selling Album for their debut album Chikondi. Ngoma Awards and Azami Awards for the best singing group.


== Political career ==
Imboela joined active politics in 2015 when she contested for the position of Mayor of Lusaka under the National Democratic Congress. After that, she was appointed spokesperson of the party, then rose through the ranks to be appointed vice president and now President of the party.
Through her time as leader of NDC, she has been arrested several times for calling for reforms and changes in Zambia. She explained in 2023 that she is “not ready to stop speaking for Zambians”, after her release.
In early 2024, the National Democratic Congress, led by Imboela, was one of the founding members of the United Kwacha Alliance (UKA), an alliance of political parties in Zambia.


== Personal life ==
Imboela lives in Lusaka. She is a mother of 3 children. The stadium in Lusaka, Edwin Imboela Stadium is named after her father. Her mother was Jenny Imboela.


== References ==