Founded in 1948 as Jungle Aviation and Radio Service by William Cameron Townsend, JAARS is a worldwide, non-profit, mission aviation and support organization with a primary focus on Bible translation support operations. JAARS provides practical support in aviation, land and maritime transportation, information technology and media. Its current president is Steve Russell, as of October 1, 2022. 
JAARS marks its 75th anniversary in 2023, with a slight adjustment to its name to incorporate its 75-year heritage—Jungle Aviation and Relay Service.
JAARS is a wholly controlled subsidiary of SIL International, but also partners with many other organizations.


== History ==
William Cameron Townsend co-founded Wycliffe Bible Translators and SIL International in 1934, and as the organization grew, he saw the need for airplanes and radio to reach remote areas around the world and to provide safe access to language groups. JAARS was originally formed as Jungle Aviation and Radio Service in Peru in 1948 and moved to its current location in Waxhaw, North Carolina, in 1961. The 572 acres of land where JAARS is located began as a 200-acre donation by the Belk family. In 1986, as a result of diversifying activities (like information technology and purchasing and shipping), JAARS officially dropped the original meaning behind the acronym and became simply "JAARS Inc." 


== Operations and activities ==


=== JAARS Base ===
JAARS' North Carolina headquarters is commonly called the "JAARS Base". The base is operated by over 500 people on 551 acres, encompassing 68 buildings. While the JAARS Base serves as the home for all the organization's core operations (like transportation), it also hosts staff from partner organizations. For example, SIL International has IT and media staff working at the JAARS Base, and Wycliffe Bible Translators USA has a large contingent of human resources personnel with offices at the center. The center's airport is registered with the FAA as JAARS-Townsend Airport (FAA LID: N52), a public-use airport. The public-use runway is 3,309' x 40' listed as good asphalt. Additionally, three grass runways are used by JAARS for standards training.


=== Aviation ===

In aviation, JAARS helps its field partners start and run local aviation programs. This help comes from training staff, setting standards, equipping aircraft, research, and more.
These associates in turn offer several transportation services to a range of individuals, including translators, support staff, consultants, trainers, linguists, Christian mission organizations, hospitals, locals, and governments. These services can also include medical evacuations and disaster relief work.
JAARS' aviation partners fly a variety of aircraft, including:

Bell Long Ranger helicopter, flown by SIL International in Papua New Guinea
Robinson R66 helicopter, flown at the JAARS Center and by SIL International in Cameroon
Cessna 206, flown at the JAARS Center and by partners in Brazil, Cameroon, and Papua New Guinea
Cessna 207, Soloy Turbine conversion, flown by SIL International in Cameroon
Cessna 208 Caravan, flown by YAJASI in Indonesia
Helio Courier, flown at the JAARS Center
Pilatus PC-12, flown by YAJASI in Indonesia
Pilatus PC-6, flown at the JAARS Center and by YAJASI in Indonesia
Quest Kodiak, flown by SIL International in Papua New Guinea
JAARS was one of fifteen organizations that financed the prototyping and development of the Quest Kodiak.


== Museum ==

The Alphabet Museum is located at the JAARS Base in Waxhaw, North Carolina. The museum was established in 1991 by JAARS founder William Cameron Townsend and focuses on the development of the world's alphabets and the history of writing systems and written languages. Exhibits include maps, paintings, sculptures, a replica of the Rosetta Stone, a Torah scroll that is over 150 years old and a handmade lyre. The languages covered include Greek, Arabic, Hebrew, Cyrillic and African languages.
The newly reopened Cardenas Building (named for former Mexican president Lázaro Cárdenas) features all new exhibits that tell the story of JAARS.


== References ==