José do Egito (English: Joseph from Egypt) is a Brazilian miniseries produced and broadcast by RecordTV. It premiered on January 30, 2013 and ended on October 9, 2013. It is based on the biblical account of the book of Genesis that deals with the patriarch Joseph, son of Jacob.


== Synopsis ==
Joseph was born around 1716 BC, in Haran, region of Mesopotamia, a ‘miracle‘ son. He is the son of Rachel, a sterile woman and the most loved wife of Jacob, who is already an old man when his son is born. Joseph soon becomes the favorite son. Joseph receives an ornamented tunic from Jacob, symbolizing he was chosen as his successor. Unaccepting of their father‘s decision and overcome by envy, the brothers decide to teach Joseph a lesson, throwing him into a deep well with no way out and they then sell the brother as a slave. Joseph is taken to Egypt. The young Hebrew becomes the servant of Potiphar, head of the Pharaoh Apepi‘s guard. Sati, the commander‘s wife, begins to feel a burning desire for Joseph, and does everything to conquer his heart, but always fails. Furious, she gets back at Joseph by lying and saying the Hebrew tried to rape her. Potiphar sends him to prison. Pharaoh Apepi begins to be tormented by strange nightmares and, when he finds out that Joseph has the gift to interpret dreams, he calls him to the royal palace. After hearing Apepi‘s dream, Joseph reveals that Egypt will enjoy seven years of bounty, which will then be replaced by long period of famine. Joseph also says it will be necessary to store enough food during the bounty period to supply the people during the times of lamentation. When hunger arrives in Canaan, Jacob sends his sons in search of food in Egypt, because he learns it is the only place on earth with food. Upon arriving before the respected governor of Egypt, Jacob‘s sons do not recognize him as their brother under the Egyptian clothing. But Joseph recognizes them and he is forced to hide in order to cry, in deep pain, almost twenty years after the betrayal. Now, only Joseph can save the brothers who made him suffer so much in the past.


== Cast ==
Ângelo Paes Leme as José
Maytê Piragibe as Azenate
Carla Cabral as Bila
Samara Felippo as Diná
Mylla Christie as Raquel
Caio Junqueira as Simeon
Eduardo Lago as Pentephres
Sandro Rocha as Seneb
Iran Malfitano as Hapu
Babi Xavier as Elisa
Gustavo Leão as Benjamin
Vitor Hugo as Judá
Marcela Barrozo as Diná (young)
Paulo Nigro as Siquém
Ricky Tavares as José (young)
Camila Rodrigues as Tamar
Guilherme Winter as Rúben
Andréa Avancini as Zilpa
Felipe Cardoso as Levi
Nanda Ziegler as Naamá
Thelmo Fernandes as Jetur
Juliana Boller as Mara
Bruno Padilha as Kedar
Henrique Ramiro as Onã
Rafael Sardão as Nekau
Caetano O'Maihlan as Gibar
Joelson Medeiros as Mitri
Henri Pagnoncelli as Hamor
Daniel Bouzas as Thot
João Vitor as Selá
Elder Gatelly as Ismael
Janaína Moura as Rebeca
Bia Braga as Mara (young)
Fernando Sampaio as Naftali
Eduardo Spinetti as Dã
Vasco Valentino as Gade
Eduardo Melo as Benjamin (young)
Binho Beltrão as Er
Edu Porto as Issacar
Wendell Duarte as Aser
Acacio Ferreira as Zebulom
Anna Rita Cerqueira as Azenate (young)
Eliete Cigarini as Grande Sacerdotisa
Maurício Ribeiro as Manassés


== Production ==
Shooting includes scenes recorded in the Atacama Desert in Chile, Egypt and Israel. For the scenery two cities were built representing Avaris, and Hebron.


== Rating ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Portuguese)
José do Egito at IMDb