Go Go 70s (Korean: 고고70) is a 2008 South Korean musical drama film set in the 1970s.


== Plot ==
South Korea in the 1970s was in the Dark Ages of Park Chung Hee's military dictatorship, but it was also an era of revolutionary upheaval with regards to culture. After wandering the shabby clubs of a U.S. military base, vocalist Sang-kyu and guitarist Man-sik form the indie rock band The Devils with four other members. After entering a rock band contest and making a strong impression with their shocking yet entertaining performance, The Devils achieve stardom and begin playing at a club called Nirvana. Mimi, a groupie who follows the Devils from town to town, also becomes an icon with her dance moves and fashion sense. However, their heyday doesn't last long as one of the band members gets killed in a fire at the club. To make matters worse, many clubs are being forced to shut down due to military oppression, which would fundamentally take away the opportunity for bands to perform. Despite their despair and looming disbandment, Sang-kyu plans one last concert for The Devils.


== Cast ==
Cho Seung-woo as Sang-kyu, The Devils vocalist and guitarist
Shin Min-a as Mimi, leader of Wild Girls
Cha Seung-woo as Man-sik, The Devils guitarist
Song Kyung-ho as Dong-geun, The Devils drummer
Choi Min-chul as Dong-soo, The Devils trumpet player
Kim Min-kyu as Kyung-goo, The Devils bassist
Hong Kwang-ho as Joon-yeob, The Devils saxophonist
Lee Sung-min as Lee Byeong-wook
Im Yeong-sik as Byeong-tae
Kim Soo-jeong as Young-ja
Yoon Chae-yeon as Ki-bok
Min Bok-gi as boss of club Nirvana
Yoo Chang-sook as Dong-soo's mother
Lee Sang-yong as Nam-dae criminal investigator
Hong Seok-bin as Criminal investigator of The Devils 1
Jo Deok-jae as Criminal investigator of The Devils 2
Kwon Jeong-min as Jailhouse police
Jin Yong-gook as Folk song singer Teacher Kim
Kim Jae-rok as Recording engineer
Kwon Hyeok-poong as Music salon owner
Hwang Yeon-hee as President of American club
Yoon Jeong-yeon as Mimi's backup dancer
Jang Mi-yeon as Mimi's backup dancer
Oh Ji-eun as Fighting prostitute
Lee Jong-yoon as Gambling band
Geum Gi-jong as Gambling band
Park Soo-jo as Jailhouse detective
Kim Jong-eon as Bat group
Lee Ha-neul as Bat group
Kim Hyeong-jin as Bat group
Lee Si-eun as Criminal investigator of Lee Byeong-wook
Im Hyeong-tae as Young-ja's father
Kim Moon-yeong as Lee Byeong-wook's fan
Lee Malg-eum as Lee Byeong-wook's fan
Hong Sang-jin as Scottman
Choi Pyeong-woong as Daehan news announcer


== Production ==
The screenplay was co-written by director Choi Ho, composer Bang Jun-seok and Baek Bae-jeong, based on Bang's experiences as a child listening to The Beatles. Lead actor Cho Seung-woo took guitar lessons to prepare for his role.


== Box office ==
The film sold 595,156 tickets nationwide and earned $3,433,279.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Korean)
Go Go 70s at the Korean Movie Database (in Korean)
Go Go 70s at IMDb
Go Go 70s at HanCinema