Ian Loveland (born September 7, 1983) is an American professional mixed martial arts fighter. Loveland has fought for promotions such as King of the Cage, International Fight League, and the Ultimate Fighting Championship.


== Mixed Martial Arts Career ==
Loveland's interest in martial arts started when he was five years old. He began training in Tae Kwon Do because, "I kept getting into fights and my parents wanted an outlet for me". Upon entering high school, Loveland realized Tae Kwon Do, "wasn't for me", and he picked up wrestling.
Before turning pro, Loveland held an amateur record of 7-0, with six submission wins and one lone knockout win. In 2005, Loveland made his professional debut defeating current UFC fighter, Bryan Caraway. He won his next two fights via first round submissions.
After earning a record of 4-4, Loveland signed onto fight for the Ring of Combat's featherweight tournament. His first fight was against former WEC fighter, Will Kerr. He defeated Kerr via first round submission, moving onto the semi-finals. Before continuing on in the tournament, Loveland defeated CJ Thompson in SportFight, and lost to Wagnney Fabiano in the International Fight League (IFL).
Loveland defeated Rich Boine in the semi-finals for the Ring of Combat tournament. A month later in the finals, Loveland was defeated by James Jones.
He lost his second fight for the IFL, being defeated by Jason Palacios. He bounced back from the two fight losing skid, winning all six of his next fights - one of which was featured for the IFL.


=== Ultimate Fighting Championship ===
With less than two weeks notice, Loveland stepped in for Leonard Garcia and fought Tyler Toner at The Ultimate Fighter 12 Finale. Loveland dominated all three rounds and won the fight via unanimous decision (30-27, 29-28, 30-26). After the fight, Loveland said he would likely drop to the bantamweight division.
Loveland faced Joseph Benavidez on March 19, 2011 at UFC 128. He lost the fight via unanimous decision.
Loveland fought Yves Jabouin on August 27, 2011 at UFC 134, losing via split decision. In the loss, Loveland suffered a possible chest injury and is out for up to 6 months. Despite the injury, he was released from the promotion.


== Mixed martial arts record ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Professional MMA record for Ian Loveland from Sherdog 
Official UFC Profile