MJ Department Stores Sdn Bhd is a popular retail company in Malaysia which offers items at a medium-to-high rate. The company opened its first store at Pertama Complex, Kuala Lumpur in September, 1976,with a retail space of 18,305 sq ft (1,705 sq metres). Metrojaya's latest outlet, in Berjaya Times Square closed in December 2009, after only three years of operation. Metrojaya currently has four outlets in Malaysia namely Mid Valley Megamall, Suria Sabah, Brem Mall and LaLaport BBCC. 
The Metrojaya group currently operates a chain of four department stores and more than 70 specialty stores that occupy over one million square feet of floor space, including Cape Cod, East India Company, Living Quarters, Reject Shop and Somerset Bay.


== Retail operations ==
The company is principally involved in operating departmental stores and investment holding whilst its subsidiary companies are principally involved in property holding, investment holding as well as the operating of specialty stores and general merchandising stores. Metrojaya department stores offer a wide range of merchandise that cater to the needs and tastes of middle and high income groups. The group operates four department stores, one hypermarket store under the Cosmart name at the Bukit Jambul Complex in Penang and one "MJ by Metrojaya" Fashion Concept Store at The Curve in Mutiara Damansara.
The retail operations can be broadly classified as:

Ladies Department (includes apparel and accessories);
Gents Department (includes apparel and accessories);
Juniors Department (for teens and young adults);
Children Department;
Homes Department (includes kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, garden);
Cosmetics and Fragrances.


== Department stores ==
West Malaysia
Brem Mall, Kepong
Mitsui Shopping Park LaLaport BBCC, Bukit Bintang
Mid Valley Megamall, Kuala Lumpur - closed from 27 February 2024 to 28 August 2024 for renovation and downsizing, reopened on 29 August 2024.
East Malaysia
Suria Sabah, Kota Kinabalu - department store closed and relocated to smaller retail lot, reopened as MJ by Metrojaya in 2023
Closed
The Curve, Mutiara Damansara (60,000 sq ft) - closed 2021
Komtar JBCC - closed 2021
CityOne Megamall, Kuching (130,000 sq ft) - closed 2019
Plaza Merdeka, Kuching
Permaisuri Imperial City Mall, Miri


== MJ Outlet ==
West Malaysia
Ampang Point Shopping Centre, Ampang
Mitsui Outlet Park KLIA Sepang, Sepang


== References ==


== External links ==
Metrojaya Berhad (MYX: 4987), bursamalaysia.com
Company Overview of Metrojaya Berhad, bloomberg.com