Daag: The Fire (transl. Stain) is a 1999 Indian Hindi-language action thriller film written, produced and directed by Raj Kanwar, starring Sanjay Dutt, Chandrachur Singh and Mahima Chaudhry in the lead roles. The film received mixed reviews but was successful at the box office . The plot was inspired from the 1991 American film Regarding Henry.


== Plot ==
Former Indian soldier Karan Singh wants to seek revenge for his upright father Satya Prakash Singh who was wrongfully jailed. His sentence resulted from a false charge and prosecution by a shrewd lawyer, Ravi Verma, backed by his father-in-law Singhal.
Singhal's daughter Kajal, is the wife of corrupt lawyer Ravi, who can win almost any case. During a court case, he falsely accuses and gets a righteous man convicted of corruption, and he commits suicide out of disgrace. His son Major Karan swears revenge and one day after a party that Kajal and Ravi attend, he fires a pistol directly at Ravi, but his wife Kajal comes in to save her husband using her body as a shield. Karan fires a second time, and Ravi is shot in the spinal cord and loses part of his memory, and the doctors diagnose him with 'retrograde amnesia".
In the hospital, Kajal succumbs to her wound and dies. As an attempt to restore Ravi's memory, Singhal requests the help of a street woman Kajri, who looks exactly like Kajal, in a dual role), to pretend to be Ravi's wife temporarily.
However, obstinate Karan is still seeking his revenge by stalking Ravi in the hospital and hatches a plan to kill Ravi. Karan and Kajri collect all the evidence that proves Karan's father's innocence. Ravi regains his memory and starts to sympathize with Karan. With the help of Kajri, he promises Karan that once he gains full recovery, he will prove to the court that Karan's father was genuinely innocent, but wrongly persecuted, presenting all the proof. Learning of this turn of events, Singhal turns the tables on Ravi.
A significant family feud ensues between Singhal and Ravi. Ravi, with the help from Karan, wins over the final court case, and finally, the real perpetrators are placed behind bars (including Singhal, who had instigated this). Ravi and Kajri unite happily at last, and Karan gives himself up to the police voluntarily and asks Ravi to defend his case.


== Cast ==
Sanjay Dutt as Captain Karan Singh
Chandrachur Singh as Ravi Verma
Mahima Chaudhry - as Kajal Verma (Nee Singhal) / Kajri (Double Role)
Sushma Seth as Tai
Shakti Kapoor -  as Dr. Anand
Sachin Khedekar - as Inspector Vinay Kumar
Raj Babbar - as Mr. Singhal
Kunika - as Nurse Lily
Johnny Lever- as Compounder Sunder
Shivaji Satam - as Satya Prakash Singh, Karan's father
Mohan Joshi as Purushottam Jalan
Harish Patel as Bihari
Neha Pendse as child


== Soundtrack ==

All music by Rajesh Roshan and lyrics by Sameer. 
"Pardesiya Itna Bata Sajna, "Dil Deewana Na Jaane ( Anuradha Paudwal solo)" was very famous at the time of the movie release. The song "Dil Deewana" borrows its charanam from "Pehli Pehli Baar Mohabbat Ki Hai" from Sirf Tum (1999). 


== Reception ==
A critic from Deccan Herald opined that "Sanjay Dutt runs along the fringes of the storyline, making occasional incursions of zero impact. Chandrachur. with his flair and self-assured air puts Sanjay’s laboured outbursts to shame. A few spirited songs by Rajesh Roshan add some spice".


== References ==


== External links ==
Daag: The Fire at IMDb