The Easter Island Foundation (EIF) is a public 501(c)3 non-profit organization registered in California. The organization is overseen by a volunteer Board of Directors who share an interest in and concern about the culture and history of Rapa Nui (Easter Island) and other Polynesian islands and include a variety of professions with expertise in anthropology, art, education, information technology, management and fundraising. The EIF supports the preservation of the Rapa Nui heritage and culture through education. It was incorporated in 1989 to give back to the community that has inspired the world through its rich history, vibrant culture and monumental archaeological treasures. https://www.easterislandfoundation.org/ 


== Background of the foundation ==
The Easter Island Foundation (EIF) was organized in 1989 by a group of concerned scientists and interested persons who together were inspired by Polynesia's incomparable archaeological treasures. Among its many projects, the Foundation established the William Mulloy Library on the island and continues to support its operations.


== Mission ==
Easter Island is isolated in the vast Pacific Ocean, halfway between Tahiti and South America. It contains spectacular archaeological wonders, many of which have been studied by scientists from all over the world. Even today, many of its mysteries remain unsolved and much work remains to be done. However, increased tourism, development and lack of infrastructure threaten its priceless heritage.
The Easter Island Foundation (EIF) aims to continue to build a solid endowment to assure the continuation of its projects by preserving this unique isolated island, its archaeological treasures and its living culture.


== Objectives of the Foundation ==
To promote an interest in research on Easter Island and other Pacific islands by anthropologists, archaeologists, linguists, environmentalists, and members of other scientific, historical, and cultural disciplines.
To work toward the conservation and preservation of Easter Island's cultural heritage and environmental character as well as historic sites and monuments in Polynesia.
To inform and educate local, national, and international groups and communities in addition to the general public with regard to Easter Island's unique heritage and priceless monumental treasures.
To facilitate communication about Easter Island and other Pacific islands among scientific disciplines, historians, and other interested parties through publication of journals, books, guides, and other media-related sources and conferences.
To develop an endowment fund through investments, bequests, corporate and Easter Island Foundation contributions, and other related sources — to provide a pool of financial resources for the support of the Foundation's programs.
To help support the William Mulloy Library for the study of Easter Island and various related disciplines, in association with the island's Museo Antropológico Padre Sebastián Englert.
To provide a scholarship program for promising Rapa Nui secondary and college students to ensure them an opportunity for advanced academic studies.
To encourage economic development activities on Easter Island that will benefit the Rapa Nui and that will honor and maintain the cultural and environmental character of the island.


== The Foundation's activities ==
The EIF helps fund archaeological research on Rapa Nui and other Polynesian islands, and provides Rapa Nui students with scholarships for higher education. The EIF also sponsors conferences about Rapa Nui and Polynesia.


== External links ==
For see more background go to History of Easter Island in History of science section.
Easter Island Foundation Archived 2010-01-23 at the Wayback Machine
William Mulloy Library Archived 2008-01-10 at the Wayback Machine
Father Sebastian Englert Anthropology Museum
Fonck Museum


== References ==