Meglin Kiddies was an American troupe of acting, music and dance performers, consisting of children up to the age of 16. It was also known as The Meglin Professional Children's School, The Meglin Dance Studio, Meglin's Dance School, and Meglin's Wondrous Hollywood Kiddies.


== Background ==
The troupe was started by Ethel Meglin in 1928. Meglin was a Ziegfeld girl in feature films. Director/actor and Slapstick Keystone King Mack Sennett was supportive of the formation of the troupe's studio. Sennett donated a Meglin Kiddie studio building sign and assisted in securing an operations location on his lot. The Johnny Grant Building at 7018-7024 Hollywood Blvd once housed the Meglin Dance Studio on its second floor.
One of the most successful child stars of all time, Shirley Temple, was a Meglin Kiddie dancer when she was recruited for her first movie role: During a visit to the Meglin Kiddie studio, Charles Lamont, a director from Educational Pictures, chose Temple, hiding under the piano, for a part in a movie that he was about to direct."
Superstar Judy Garland was also a Meglin Kiddie. Garland's mother, Ethel Gumm, played the piano at the Meglin Kiddie studio to help pay for Garland's singing and dancing lessons there. The film debut of Judy Garland was in Meglin Kiddie short films. Garland also performed with the Meglin Kiddies over the radio, and live at theaters such as: Shrine Auditorium, Pantages Theatre (Hollywood), and Loew's State Theater in Los Angeles, California.
In the 1950s, the Meglin Kiddies had a television show.
Ethel Meglin retired in 1962, as did the studio and dance troupe.


== Movies ==
The Big Revue (1929)--AKA "The Meglin Kiddie Revue" & AKA "The Starlet Revue"—with Judy Garland (Francis Gumm & Sisters)
The Land of Oz (1932) --Production company and actors/dancers (Film adapted from the book, Land of Oz)
Show Kids (1934)
In Love with Life (1934) --Floor show performers at the Kiddie Kabaret
Too Many Parents(uncredited) (1936) --Themselves
Roarin’ Lead (1936) --Dancers
Maytime (1937) --Children In Maypole Number
The Wizard of Oz (1939) --Munchkin child actors and dancers
Reg’lar Fellers (1941) --Billy Lee's Band --Associate Producer: Ethel Meglin


== Notable Meglin Kids ==
In alphabetical order:

Scotty Beckett
Jackie Cooper
Roland Dupree
Nola Fairbanks
Judy Garland
Kathy Garver
Farley Granger
Virginia Grey
Darryl Hickman
Dwayne Hickman
June Lang
Billy Lee
Cherylene Lee
Virginia Lee
Paul Marco
Mary McCarty
Ann Miller
Sidney Miller
June Preston
Mickey Rooney
Peggy Ryan
Melody Thomas Scott
Betta St. John
Shirley Temple
Jane Withers


== References ==


== External links ==
The Meglin Kiddies at IMDb
The Meglin Kiddies production of The Land of Oz at IMDb