The Latin Quarter of Paris (French: Quartier latin, IPA: [kaʁtje latɛ̃]) is an urban university campus in the 5th and the 6th arrondissements of Paris. It is situated on the left bank of the Seine, around the Sorbonne.
Known for its student life, lively atmosphere, and bistros, the Latin Quarter is one of the oldest parts of the universities of Paris. It continues to be the heart of the universities and Grandes écoles that succeeded the University of Paris, such as:

the Sorbonne University, with the Sorbonne, and the Jussieu campus;
the Panthéon-Sorbonne University, with the Panthéon Centre and its Law School, and which also has teaching programs within the Sorbonne;
the Paris Cité University, with the École de Médecine building and the Cordeliers campus;
the PSL University, with the École Normale Supérieure, the Collège de France, the École des Mines, the École Nationale Supérieure de Chimie, or the ENSAD.
and the Panthéon-Assas University, with its Assas Law School within the Panthéon Centre.
But also of:

the lycée Henri-IV, the lycée Louis-le-Grand and the lycée Saint-Louis, known as les trois lycées de la montagne;
Sciences Po;
and the Schola Cantorum.
Other Grandes écoles such as the École polytechnique have relocated in recent times to more spacious settings, notably in Paris-Saclay.
The area gets its name from the Latin language, which was widely spoken in and around the University during the Middle Ages, after the twelfth century philosopher Pierre Abélard and his students took up residence there.


== Buildings and university centres ==
The Latin Quarter is home to many academic institutions, including Sorbonne University and the Panthéon-Sorbonne University in the Sorbonne historical building. It is also home to the largest university libraries in Paris, such as the Sainte-Geneviève Library, the Sorbonne Library, the Sainte-Barbe Library, the Assas Law Library and the Cujas Law Library. University administrative buildings are also located there, such as the presidency of Sorbonne University in the Cordeliers Convent or the headquarters of Paris Cité University in the former École de Médecine.
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== See also ==
List of restaurant districts and streets
Montagne Sainte-Geneviève
Paris Sciences et Lettres University
Sorbonne University
Université Paris Cité


== References ==


== Further reading ==
André Arnold-Peltier, Vassili Karist, Le Quartier Latin et ses entours / and its surroundings, Éditions PIPPA, collection Itinérances (ISBN 978-2-916506-02-9)
André Arnold-Peltier, Vassili Karist, Le jardin du Luxembourg / The Luxembourg gardens, Éditions PIPPA, collection Itinérances (ISBN 2916506004)
Sophie Peltier-Le Dinh, Danielle Michel-Chich, André Arnold-Peltier, Le Lycée Henri-IV, entre potaches et moines copistes, Éditions PIPPA, collection Itinérances (ISBN 978-2-916506-16-6)


== External links ==
(in French) quartierlatin.paris - online Review about cultural activities in Quartier Latin (bookshops, publishers, gallery, cinema, theaters, etc.)
(in French) The Quartier Latin - In depth exploration of literary culture, wine bars and Oscar Wilde
(in French) The Quartier Latin - current photographs and of the years 1900
Paris CVB-Latin Quarter
The Latin Quarter - More information and historical context from travel writers focused on France.