The Righteous Gemstones is an American crime comedy drama television series created by Danny McBride that premiered on August 18, 2019, on HBO. The series follows a famous and dysfunctional family of televangelists. It stars McBride, Adam DeVine, Edi Patterson, Tony Cavalero, Cassidy Freeman, Gregory Alan Williams, Tim Baltz, and John Goodman. The series has aired three seasons, and was renewed for a fourth in 2023.


== Premise ==
The Righteous Gemstones depicts a family of televangelists and megachurch pastors led by widowed patriarch Eli Gemstone. Eli and his immature children, Jesse, Judy and Kelvin, lead opulent lives funded by church donations.
In the first season, Eli's estranged brother-in-law, Baby Billy Freeman, is brought in to lead the Gemstones' new shopping-mall-based satellite church, which leads to a conflict with Rev. John Wesley Seasons whose smaller, neighboring church is threatened. Concurrently, a trio of masked figures blackmail Jesse with a scandalous video documenting the lewd behavior of him and his best friends.
In the second season, Jesse and Amber partner with Texas megachurch leaders Lyle and Lindy Lissons to develop a Christian timeshare resort. The family faces threats including investigative journalist Thaniel Block, an old friend from Eli's criminal past Junior, and a mysterious group of motorcycle-riding assassins.
In the third season, Eli scales back his involvement in the church, handing over greater control to his children. Eli's impoverished sister, May–May, resurfaces, asking for his assistance in keeping her family safe from her ex-husband, Peter, a vengeful militia leader who holds a decades-long grudge against the Gemstones. Meanwhile, Judy's affair with a musician while on tour leads to bitter consequences in her relationship with BJ.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Danny McBride as Jesse Gemstone, Eli's oldest son and associate pastor of the Gemstone Salvation Center. Although appearing to be a faithful father and husband, Jesse barely conceals a crude and arrogant personality and a debauched lifestyle, which he often partakes in with his "gang" of friends and subordinates.
Adam DeVine as Kelvin Gemstone, Eli's youngest son and youth pastor of the Gemstone Salvation Center. Kelvin strives to prove himself as a leader, despite his immaturity and impulsiveness. He shares his mansion with his recent convert and best friend, Keefe Chambers, who becomes his lover in the third season.
Edi Patterson as Judy Gemstone, Eli's daughter. Judy, the middle child, often feels underestimated by her family as she tries to follow in her mother's footsteps as a singer and star of the church's services. She is prone to inappropriate behavior and angry outbursts.
Tony Cavalero as Keefe Chambers, a dim-witted ex-Satanist who lives with Kelvin and works closely with him at the Gemstone's church. Keefe is fiercely loyal to Kelvin, with whom he becomes romantically involved in the third season.
Cassidy Freeman as Amber Gemstone, Jesse's wife who projects the image of a supportive and loving spouse. She encourages Jesse's ambitions to take more control of the church while privately struggling with his negative qualities. She is an Olympic markswoman.
Greg Alan Williams as Martin Imari, Eli's right-hand-man and the Gemstones' accountant who is often entrusted with the day-to-day operations of the church and cleaning up after the family's scandals.
Tim Baltz as Benjamin Jason "BJ" Barnes, Judy's sensitive and mediocre fiancé, and later, husband. He is often intimidated by Judy, although it's apparent that he really loves her. BJ works in an optometrist's office in a local grocery store.  He's looked down on by the rest of the family for his odd actions and for being raised by liberal atheists.
John Goodman as Dr. Elijah "Eli" Gemstone, the patriarch of the Gemstone family and lead pastor of the Gemstone Salvation Center. Eli is a widower, having lost his wife, Aimee-Leigh, one year prior to the start of the series. Although not as openly greedy and vulgar as his children, Eli often prioritizes his own wealth and status ahead of spirituality.
Skyler Gisondo as Gideon Gemstone, Jesse's oldest son, who moved to California to be a stunt performer, an act that Jesse considered to be a betrayal. Gideon later reconciles with his family and returns to work for the church. He is a skilled martial artist and stunt driver.
Dermot Mulroney as Rev. John Wesley Seasons (season 1), a pastor of a much smaller congregation, forced to compete with the Gemstones' new church in Locust Grove
Walton Goggins as Baby Billy Freeman (season 1, recurring seasons 2–3), Eli's brother-in-law and brother of the deceased Aimee-Leigh Gemstone. A faded child star who was once part of a Gospel song-and-dance double-act with his sister, Baby Billy is a habitual liar whose financial dependence, bad influence on Jesse and Judy, and tendency to abandon his loved ones strained his relationship with the Gemstones. Baby Billy resides at Freeman's Gap, his and Aimee-Leigh's childhood home in the Appalachian Mountains, with his much younger wife Tiffany.
Jennifer Nettles as Aimee-Leigh Gemstone, Eli's deceased wife and mother of Jesse, Judy, and Kelvin. She appears in flashbacks, hallucinations, and as a hologram.


=== Recurring ===
Valyn Hall as Tiffany Freeman, Baby Billy's much younger and childish wife, later the mother of their child, Lionel
Jody Hill as Levi, a member of Jesse's "gang" and guitarist at the Gemstone Salvation Center
James DuMont as Chad, a member of Jesse's "gang" whose marriage falls apart after the revelation of his scandalous behavior.
Troy Anthony Hogan as Matthew, a member of Jesse's "gang"
J. LaRose as Gregory, a member of Jesse's "gang"
Kelton DuMont as Pontius Gemstone, Jesse's ill-mannered second son
Gavin Munn as Abraham Gemstone, Jesse's youngest son
Scott MacArthur as Scotty Steele (season 1), Gideon's friend and possible romantic partner from Los Angeles
Mary Hollis Inboden as Mandy, wife, and later, ex-wife of Chad
Cullen Moss as Brock, a security guard at the Gemstones' family compound
Jade Pettyjohn as Dot Nancy (season 1), Dale and Gay Nancy's rebellious teenage daughter
Jason Schwartzman as Thaniel Block (season 2), an investigative reporter writing about the Gemstone family
Eric Roberts as Glendon "Junior" Marsh Jr. (season 2), a professional wrestling promoter who shares a criminal past with Eli.
Eric André as Lyle Lissons (season 2), a prominent Texas televangelist who wants to work with Jesse
Jessica Lowe as Lindy Lissons (season 2), Lyle's wife and business partner
Steve Zahn as Peter Montgomery (season 3), a militia leader, and Eli's estranged brother-in-law.
Kristen Johnston as Mary "May–May" Montgomery (season 3), Eli's younger sister, Peter's wife, and mother to Chuck and Karl
Stephen Dorff as  Vance Simkins (season 3), Jesse's rival who leads a competing church alongside his siblings.
Shea Whigham as Dusty Daniels (season 3), an aging NASCAR driver and prominent donor to the Gemstones' church.
Lukas Haas as Chuck Montgomery (season 3), Peter and May–May's son, Eli's nephew, and cousin to the Gemstone siblings.
Robert Oberst as Karl Montgomery (season 3), Peter and May–May's son, Eli's nephew, and cousin to the Gemstone siblings.
Stephen Schneider as Stephen (season 3), a musician with whom Judy has a brief affair while on tour.
Iliza Shlesinger as Shay Marigold (season 3), Vance Simkins' sister.
Gogo Lomo-David as Craig Simkins (season 3), Vance Simkins' brother.
Sturgill Simpson as Marshall (season 3), a member of Peter's militia.
Casey Wilson as Kristy (season 3), Stephen's wife.
Jennifer R. Blake as Deena Milsap (season 4)
Crystal Coney as Angie
Maggie Winters as Taryn


=== Guest ===
Virginia Gardner as Lucy (season 1), Scotty's girlfriend and Gideon's friend
M. Emmet Walsh as Grandaddy Roy Gemstone (seasons 1–2), Eli's father
Toby Huss as Dale Nancy (season 1), a loose parody of Dan Cathy, and a congregant and donor to the Gemstones' church
Marla Maples as Gay Nancy (season 1), Dale Nancy's wife
Joe Jonas as himself (season 2), a co-investor in Zion's Landing
Wayne Duvall as Glendon Marsh Sr. (season 2), a professional wrestling promoter and organized crime figure
Macaulay Culkin as Harmon Freeman (season 2), Baby Billy Freeman's estranged son from a previous marriage, whom he abandoned in 1993. Jeremy T. Thomas portrays a younger Harmon in flashbacks.
John Amos as Buddy Lissons (season 2), Lyle's father. This would be Amos' final television appearance prior to his death in 2024.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2019) ===


=== Season 2 (2022) ===


=== Season 3 (2023) ===


== Production ==


=== Development ===
On June 28, 2018, it was announced that HBO had given the production a pilot order. The episode was written and directed by Danny McBride who is also executive producer alongside Jody Hill and David Gordon Green. On October 2, 2018, it was reported that HBO had given the production a series order. On July 1, 2019, it was announced that the series would premiere on August 18, 2019. On September 9, 2019, the series was renewed for a second season. On January 25, 2022, HBO renewed the series for a third season. On July 27, 2023, HBO renewed the series for a fourth season.


=== Writing ===
McBride has said he intends the series to run "longer than anything we've done before," including the four-season Eastbound & Down and the two-season Vice Principals. "If I had my way, when this is done, it's like this epic, sprawling tale, like the fucking Thorn Birds or something," he told Polygon. "You'll know everybody in this family, cousins, great uncles, all these people. In my eyes, this season is chapter one. It's just setting the table for who all these people are and what's about to happen." Like McBride's previous television characters, the Gemstones have "an inflated sense of self". McBride comments, "To me, the idea of a minister that sees themself as bigger than God just feels like the ultimate display of that."
For the second season, Eli's backstory was inspired by the Dixie Mafia and the Memphis professional wrestling business, two subjects that have long fascinated McBride. He has stated that the Gemstones were originally inspired by Mafia families and that Eli's gangster background informs how the character runs his church in the present. He draws a parallel between wrestling and televangelism in that both businesses are built around "showmanship" and maintaining "kayfabe".


=== Casting ===
Alongside the pilot order announcement, it was confirmed that Danny McBride and John Goodman would star in the pilot. In July 2018, it was announced that Edi Patterson, Adam DeVine, Cassidy Freeman, Tony Cavalero, and Tim Baltz had also joined the pilot's main cast. In May 2021, Jason Schwartzman, Eric Roberts, and Eric André joined the cast in recurring roles for the second season.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for the pilot was completed in August 2018 in Charleston, South Carolina, at Citadel Mall. The North Charleston Coliseum served as the interior of Gemstone Ministries, while a former Sears store at Citadel Mall was re-purposed into the Locust Grove Worship Center. (The new church being a former Sears was kept and referenced in the series). In April 2021, HBO confirmed the second season had gone into production, having continued to film mainly in Charleston. In September 2022, it was reported that production on the third season was shut down due to the landfall of Hurricane Ian in South Carolina. Filming for the third season wrapped in December 2022.
Filming for the fourth season began in May 2024 and ended in early October 2024.


=== Music ===
The series music is composed by Joseph Stevens, who has collaborated with McBride on his previous television series. An original song "Misbehavin'" became a viral hit after its debut in the episode "Interlude". Performed by Jennifer Nettles and Walton Goggins as their characters Aimee-Leigh and Baby Billy, "Misbehavin'" is the fictional Freeman siblings' most popular song which they performed as children in the 1960s and reprised as adults in 1989. The song was written by McBride, co-star and co-writer Edi Patterson, and composer Stevens, who designed it to mimic a wholesome, old-time country song but with absurd lyrics such as "Runnin' through the house with a pickle in my mouth".


=== Release ===
On December 24, 2018, a "first look" still image from the series was released featuring Danny McBride, John Goodman, and Adam DeVine as Jesse Gemstone, Eli Gemstone, and Kelvin Gemstone, respectively. The series premiered on HBO on August 18, 2019. The second season premiered on January 9, 2022. The third season premiered on June 18, 2023.


=== Home media ===
The first season was released on DVD, on April 14, 2020.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
For the first season, the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 76% approval rating with an average rating of 7.1/10, based on 66 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads: "Though it may not win many new converts, fans of Danny McBride will find much to praise in The Righteous Gemstones's darkly hilarious pews." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the season a score of 67 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
For the second season, Rotten Tomatoes reported a 89% approval rating with an average rating of 7.5/10, based on 19 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads: "The Righteous Gemstones' second season can be as messy as its title characters, but it's hard to complain when the results are this uproariously funny." Metacritic assigned the season a score of 82 out of 100, based on 11 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
For the third season, Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100% approval rating with an average rating of 8/10, based on 14 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads: "The Righteous Gemstones has its mixture of broad comedy and genuine pathos down pat, chapter and verse, and it preaches a riotously funny gospel in what might be its darkest installment yet." Metacritic assigned the season a score of 80 out of 100, based on 9 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


=== Accolades ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
The Righteous Gemstones at IMDb