Charles Negron II (born June 8, 1942) is an American singer-songwriter. He is best known as a founding member and lead vocalist of the rock band Three Dog Night.


== Early life ==
Chuck Negron was born on June 8, 1942, in Manhattan, New York City, to Charles Negron, a Puerto Rican nightclub singer, and Elizabeth Rooke. When Negron was five years old, his parents divorced. Negron and his twin sister, Nancy, were raised by their mother, who placed them in a daycare facility while she supported her young children. Though Negron refers to this facility as an orphanage, it was a mansion in the Bronx that contained a swimming pool, gymnasium, arts and crafts and more. The facility did house some long-term residents, though this did not include Negron and his sister.
Negron grew up in the Bronx, where he sang in local doo-wop groups and played basketball both in schoolyard pick-up games and at William Howard Taft High School. He was recruited to play basketball at Allan Hancock College, a small community college in Santa Maria, California and played later at California State University, Los Angeles.


== Career ==
In 1967, singer Danny Hutton invited Negron to join him and Cory Wells to found the band Three Dog Night. The group became one of the most successful bands of the late 1960s and early 1970s, selling approximately 60 million records and earning gold records for singles that featured Negron as lead singer, including "One," "Easy To Be Hard," "Joy to the World," "Old Fashioned Love Song" and "The Show Must Go On." Three Dog Night disbanded in 1976. Negron returned with the band in 1981, but left in 1985.Negron wrote his autobiography, Three Dog Nightmare (1999), in which he describes his life as a high school athlete and a member of a successful rock band. He writes about his descent into drug abuse and attributes his recovery from heroin addiction to his turning to God in desperation after dropping out from more than thirty drug treatment facilities. A revised edition with several new chapters was released in 2008 and an updated version was released in 2018.
In 2006, Negron was featured in an episode of the A&E reality show Intervention about his son, Chuckie, and grandson, Noah.


== Family ==
Negron has been married four times. He married Paula Louise Ann Goetten in 1970 and they divorced in 1973. Together they had a daughter, Shaunti Negron-Levick. In 1976, he married Julia Densmore, the former wife of The Doors drummer John Densmore. They were married for twelve years and divorced in 1988. Together they had a son, Charles "Chuckie" Negron III (she has a son, Berry Duane Oakley Jr., from a previous relationship with Allman Brothers Band bassist Berry Oakley). 
In 1993, Negron married Robin Silna. They had a daughter, Charlotte Rose, and divorced in 2001. He married his manager, Ami Albea, on May 9, 2020. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the wedding took place on the balcony of their home, with his two youngest daughters and the minister on the street below.
Negron has a daughter, Annabelle Negron, with actress Kate Vernon. Actor Taylor Negron was Negron's cousin.


== Addictions ==
Negron developed a serious heroin addiction, which began in the early 1970s. In July 1975, the British music magazine NME reported that Negron had been arrested for cocaine possession in Kentucky. 
After many attempts at rehabilitation, Negron overcame his addiction in September 1991 and embarked on a solo career.


== COPD ==
In 1991, Negron was diagnosed with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or COPD for short. Chuck was advised in 2016 by doctors that unless he retires, his health would be in risk if he kept on performing, and not wanting either things to happen, began wearing Oxy-View glasses (a special type of glasses that have a cannula inside the temples of his glasses, that are connected to an off–stage oxygen machine) on stage, and has an inhaler nearby. Negron mentioned that he sometimes uses a Cannula that goes in his nose, but refuses to be seen on stage with them.


== Albums ==
Am I Still in Your Heart? (1995)
Joy to the World (1996), a Christmas CD
Long Road Back (1999)
Chuck Negron – Live in Concert (2001),
A double CD set
Recorded at Southern Methodist University (Dallas)
Released on Sindrome Records
Richard Campbell on bass guitar
Danny Mishkit on guitar, keyboards and saxophone
Frank Reina on drums
Terence Elliott on lead guitar
Live and In Concert (2005)
The Chuck Negron Story (2005)
Negron Generations (2017)


== References ==


== Sources ==
Negron, Chuck; Chris Blatchford (2000). Three Dog Nightmare: The Chuck Negron Story. Renaissance Books. 158063155X.


== External links ==

Official website
Chuck Negron at AllMusic 
Chuck Negron discography at Discogs