Bhakta Jayadeva is a 1961 Indian Telugu-language biographical film, based on the life of 12th Century   Sanskrit Poet Jayadeva, produced by Komaravolu Narayana Rao, G. Paramdhama Reddy under the Lalitha Kala Nikethan banner and directed by P. V. Rama Rao, while Ramakrishna took care of direction supervision. It stars Akkineni Nageswara Rao, Anjali Devi and music composed by Saluri Rajeshwara Rao.
The same picture was already made Telugu in 1938 with the same title, which was produced by Andhra Cinetone at Visakhapatnam and directed by Bengali director Hiren Bose. It stars Surabhi Kamalabai, Santha Kumari, V. Venkateswarlu, Rentachintala Satyanarayana in pivotal roles.


== Plot ==
The film begins with Jayadeva, a librettist & orphan, brought by a couple with their son Parasera. Jayadeva writes poems about the sacral love of Radha Krishna, which are disdained. So, he quits to get acclaim for his literature and lands at an Ashram of Saint Krishnanda, Radha Krishna's follower. Here, Krishnanda identifies that he is destined at birth to fulfill the philosophy of Radha Krishna and accommodates him. Once, Jayadeva spots the public forcibly transforming a naive Padmavati into a Devadasi. So, to bar it, he knits her, which irks chieftain Kamakeetu, who lusts for Padmavati. Parasera takes them to their hometown when Jayadeva acquires a statue of Radhakrishna midway floating in a river. Meanwhile, Kamakethu walks to Jayadeva's village and slanders Padmavati, and they are ostracized. Then Krishna flagrantly inseminates Jayadeva's faith to the community. Next, Jayadeva scriptures a book Geeta Govindam which fascinates everyone. Eventually, the king of Puri also signs poems on Jagannath when he perceives the adulation of Jayadeva and behests to present him in the court. Both keep their poetry before the Lord, and Jayadeva is endorsed when the king bows his head down. On his return, Jayadeva is backstabbed by Kamakeethu when Lakshmanasena Maharaja, the king of Navadweepa, saves him. Being an advent devotee of Radhakrishna, Lakshmanasena invites Jayadeva to his court, which envies the remaining poets. Moreover, Kamakeetu also hits therein, infuriating them. However, Jayadeva triumphs over the scholar when they highly accolades him. Simultaneously, Jayadeva is on the verge of accomplishing Geeta Govindam. Still, he is cramped when Krishna closes it in his form and takes Padmavati's hospitality. Discerning it, the couple is ravished when Lakshmanasena visits, and they take the deity's leftovers. Knowing it, the queen hurts, and she also argues with Padmavati about Sathi. Padmavati declares that the legitimate wife should spontaneously die with her husband. At that moment, the queen falsifies Jayadeva's death when Padmavati immediately leaves her breath. At last, Jayadeva recoups his wife with his holy power. Finally, the movie ends happily with Jayadeva & Padmavathi taking salvation into Radhakrishna.


== Cast ==
Akkineni Nageswara Rao as Jayadeva
Anjali Devi as Padmavathi
Relangi as Paraserudu
V. Nagayya as Krishnadas
C.S.R
Mikkilineni as Lakshmanasena Maharaju
Mukkamala as Kamakeetu
Vangara
Allu Ramalingaiah
Sandhya as Rani
Surabhi Kamalabai
E. V. Saroja as Dancer


== Crew ==
Art: Gokhale
Choreography: Vempati, Pasumarthi, Gopikrishna
Lyrics - Dialogues: Samudrala Sr
Playback: Ghantasala, P. Susheela, Jikki A. M. Rajah, P. B. Sreenivas, Madhavapeddi Satyam, Ramanujacharyulu
Music: S. Rajeswara Rao
Editing: B. Harinarayanaiah
Cinematography: Venkat
Producer: Komaravolu Narayana Rao, G. Paramdhama Reddy
Screenplay - Director: P. V. Rama Rao
Supervision: P. S. Ramakrishna Rao
Banner: Lalitha Kala Nikethan
Release Date: 7 April 1961


== Soundtrack ==

Music composed by S. Rajeswara Rao. Lyrics were written by Samudrala Sr. 


== Other ==
VCDs & DVDs on - SHALIMAR Video Company, Hyderabad


== References ==


== External links ==
1938 Bhakta Jayadeva at IMDb.
1961 Bhakta Jayadeva at IMDb.