The Hypnogogue is a 2023 studio album by Australian psychedelic rock band The Church.


== Reception ==
According to the review aggregator Metacritic, The Hypnogogue received "universal acclaim" based on a weighted average score of 86 out of 100 from eight critic scores. Editors at AllMusic rated this album 4.5 out of 5 stars, with critic Matt Collar writing that the band manages to write "more sophisticated and mature versions of their classic material" on this concept album. Hal Horowitz of American Songwriter gave this release 3.5 out of 5 stars and writing that "the quintet creates fluid moods, moving in idiosyncratic directions while maintaining the shadowy gaze that has defined The Church's style". In Glide Magazine, Doug Collette writes that "this latest work would function effectively as an introduction to this rock and roll institution from Down Under" for displaying their "vintage sound including blended acoustic guitars". At PopMatters, John Garratt gave this album a 9 out of 10, calling it "another stunning record" by the band. Dom Gourlay of Under the Radar scored The Hypnogogue a 7.5 out of 10, stating that it "reaffirms why this band have been held in high esteem for so long" and the two ending tracks elevate "The Hypnagogue to even dizzier heights among the higher echelons of The Church's already impressive canon".
PopMatters ranked this the 23rd best rock album of the year. Editors at Spin included this among the albums of the year.


== Track listing ==
All songs written by The Church.

"Ascendence" – 5:38
"C'est la vie" – 4:55
"I Think I Knew" – 3:57
"Flickering Lights" – 4:50
"The Hypnogogue" – 6:13
"Albert Ross" – 3:54
"Thorn" – 4:12
"Aerodrome" – 4:32
"These Coming Days" – 4:37
"No Other You" – 4:10
"Succulent" – 6:48
"Antarctica" – 5:34
"Second Bridge" – 5:20


== Personnel ==
The Church

Jeffrey Cain – guitar, bass guitar, keyboards, backing vocals, additional engineering, co-production, photography
Ian Haug – guitar, backing vocals
Steve Kilbey – bass guitar, keyboards, guitar, lead vocals, production, inside cover painting, photography
Ashley Naylor – guitar, backing vocals
Tim Powles – drums, percussion, guitar, backing vocals, additional engineering, co-production
Additional personnel

Andrew Beck – tracking, engineering, co-production
Carl Breitkreuz – design
Richard Bruxner – photography
Ted Howard – additional engineering
David Ives – masteringat 101 Mastering
Roger Mason – strings, additional keyboards
Kip McClanahan – executive production
Christiana Monored – cover collage
Georgia St. James – backing vocals on "No Other You"
Tim Powles – additional engineering, co-production
Darrell Thorp – mixing
Brad Timko – additional engineering


== See also ==
List of 2023 albums


== References ==


== External links ==
The Hypnogogue at Discogs (list of releases) 
The Hypnogogue at MusicBrainz (list of releases)