Kohinoor (Nepali: कोहिनूर) is a 2014 Nepali action-drama film written and directed by Aakash Adhikari. It was produced by Shankar Shrestha, Chandra Prasad Shrestha, Shambhu Shrestha and Shweta Khadka under the banner of Nepa Movies Pvt. Ltd. The film features an ensemble cast including Late Shree Krishna Shrestha, Shweta Khadka, Mithila Sharma and Samrat Sapkota. The film was released on theatres worldwide on August 8, 2014. 
The film met with positive response from critics and audience with praise directed towards performance of lead actors, story, music and direction. The film released with an overwhelming response from the audiences as it witnessed an unprecedented success at the Nepal box office. Kohinoor set the box office on fire as it became the first ever film in the history of Nepali cinema to amass Nrs 10 Crore at the box office and became Highest Grossing Nepali movie of all time. It was the last film for veteran actor Shree Krishna Shrestha, as he passed away two-days later on August 10 while undergoing treatment for pneumonia.


== Synopsis ==
The film details the incidents of girl trafficking from Nepal to Indian city of Mumbai and hardships faced by them when they're forced into a brothel. It depicts the effort of a Nepali man who falls in love with Kohinoor, a girl in brothel, to save her from the shackles of wretchedness.


== Cast ==
Shree Krishna Shrestha as Abhishek Kharel (Babu)
Shweta Khadka as Kohinoor
Mithila Sharma
Samrat Sapkota
Mukunda Shrestha
Sunil Katwal
Ramesh Adhikari


== Reception ==
The film was released on August 8, 2014. Shrestha couldn't attend the premier of his film as he and his wife Shweta Khadka travelled to India shortly after their marriage, where his health began to decline. He was diagnosed with pneumonia and bone cancer. He died at the age of 47 in Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi. After his demise, the film received overwhelming affection from the Nepali audience as they flocked into the theatres across the country to witness the legendary actor one last time in the big screen. Audience also connected with the story of girl trafficking as the film received positive responses from everyone. 
Box Office
The film was a tsunami at the box office as it became the first ever film in Nepal to touch NRs 10 Crore (100 million), which was unthinkable at that time. It broke all the previous records and became a monstrous blockbuster. Nepali audience showered their gratitude towards the actor as It saw an unprecedented footfalls across the country. It's estimated that the film closed its business after grossing nearly 11 crores.


== References ==


== External links ==
Kohinoor at IMDb