Sea Princesses  (known as Princesas do Mar in Brazil) is a series of children's books created by the Brazilian writer and cartoonist Fábio Yabu. The first book was released in 2004 by publisher Panda Books; due to its success, three other books were made.
In 2007, it was adapted into an Australian-Spanish-Brazilian cartoon produced by the Spanish studio Neptuno Films and the Australian distributor Southern Star Entertainment. It was broadcast in 50 countries including France on Piwi+, Germany on KiKa, Spain on Disney Junior, Portugal on RTP2 ZigZag, South Africa on K-T.V., Italy on Rai 2 (On Playhouse Disney block) & Rai Gulp and United Kingdom on Tiny Pop. It aired in the United States in Discovery Familia from 2007 to 2013, dubbed into Latin American Spanish. As of today the show is still available on Amazon Prime Video for streaming and is also on Pluto TV.


== Plot ==
The stories are in the world of Salacia, a hidden kingdom under the sea, full of princes and princesses from different animal species. Fearing an inevitable conflict with the people of Terra Firma, the kings and queens of the sea forbid their daughters and sons to have any contact with the surface people who are completely unaware of the existence of Salacia. Three princesses, the show's protagonists, live, go to school and play together as friends: Polvina, the Octopus Kingdom princess; Tubarina, the Shark Kingdom princess and Ester, the Starfish Kingdom princess living unraveling the mysteries of Salacia.


== Characters ==


=== Main ===
Polvina (Pulpita in European Spanish and Pulpina in Latin Spanish) – She is the pink Sea Princess of the Octopuses. Polvina is a quiet and peaceful girl, timid as octopuses. Her best friends are Ester and Tubarina, who always live great adventures. She is voiced by Isabella Dunwill.
Ester (Estella in European Spanish) – She is the yellow Sea Princess of the Starfish, and best friend of Polvina. She usually attends the Palace of the Octopus from time to time, especially after school and on weekends. Ester is a very curious girl, loves to read and watch documentaries on television. She dreams to know the Mainland and also the Star-heaven. She is voiced by Katherine Cohn Beck.
Tubarina (Tiburina in European and Latin Spanish) – She is the blue Sea Princess of the Sharks, and daughter of one of the most powerful men in Salacia, King Shark. Tubarina is very ingenious, and disagrees with the common stereotype that sharks are evil. She is voiced by Paige Walker.


=== Others ===
Marcelo – He is the Prince of Hammerhead Sharks, and cousin to Tubarina. He moved to Castle Sharks while his parents, the King and Queen Hammerhead, make an important trip. Marcelo likes to tease girls and is always the first in sports competitions. Occasionally, he fights with Tubarina, but deep down they are like siblings.
Bia (Bea) – She is the princess of the Abyssal Kingdom, responsible for maintaining order in Beyondness sea and take care of the throne while her parents are travel throughout the kingdom. She carries a scepter of light and unlike the other princesses only study the night school of the sea. She is very fond of Polvina, Esther and Tubarina. She is voiced by Roslyn Oades.
Hugo – The Prince of Turtles, heir to the throne with his twin sister, Tata. Like Tata, Hugo loves sports, especially the radicals. He is the best friend of Marcelo's cousin Tubarina, which always leads to their confusion.
Marli (Marley) – She is the Princess of Swordfish, an arrogant girl and  rival to Esther,  wanting to overcome her at school and at any activity. However she is a good girl despite all this. In the books she is basically the opposite being a shy, quiet girl. Her crown is a cheerful swordfish hooked in her hair.
Isa – The Princess of the Penguins. She is the only student from the School of the Sea which does not live underwater; she lives in the South Pole, the Kingdom of Penguins. Isa was afraid of water, but with the help of Santa Claus, she overcame her fear and today she wears a small fondly Santa-Claus helper hat on her crown.
Elektra - The princess of the Electric Eels
Julie and Jessie - The sister princesses of the Clown Fish
Matilda - The princess of the Hawkfish
Dinho - The prince of the Blowfish
Mauricio - The prince of the Sea Urchins
Goldina - The princess of the Goldfish
Agostina - The princess of the Lobsters
Socita - The princess of the Grouper Fish
Vivi - The princess of the Jellyfish
Carlos - The prince of the Salmon
Marcela - Marcelo's sister and princess of the Hammerhead Sharks
Soraya - The princess of the Stingray
Janue - The princess of the Blue Lyretail
Vito - Tubarina's brother and prince of the Sharks
Camerelo - The prince of the Snails
Cirilo - The prince of the Crabs
Leia - The princess of the Whales
Angelica - The princess of the Angelfish
Lia - The princess of the Lionfish
Camarina - The princess of the Shrimp
Tata - Hugo's sister and princess of the Sea Turtles
Delfi - The princess of the Dolphins
Ms. Marla - The teacher of Salacia's school
Duante - A traveler who helps sick fish in need.


== TV series ==
The series made its debut in the United States on Discovery Family and Discovery Junior (syndication). In Latin America, it was broadcast on Discovery Kids. In 2010, the series debuted on Nick Jr. in Australia before being rerun on free-to-air television by the Seven Network. It has been confirmed than the series will also debut on Treehouse. In 2017, the series debuted on Tiny Pop and Disney Junior in United Kingdom. All characters speak in American accents despite being played by Australian actors.


=== Episodes ===


==== Season 1 ====
Lost
The Pearl
The Boy
The Golden Penguins
The Royal Ball
The Biggest Fish
The Diary
The Toy
The Missing Crown
The Babysitters
The Return
Homeless
The Monster
The Party
Art
The Picture
The New Pet
Stage Fright
The Argument
The Silence
The Excuse
The Race
The Rescue
Who's Who
Sharing
Tubarina Almighty
The Ticklish Octopus
Shooting Star
The Trick
The Big Game
One Too Many
The Hammerheads
Big Brother
The Lost Kingdom
The Gift
The Crush
The Head Top
The Dingleberry Mystery
The Makeover
The Doll
Best Friends
The New Teacher
The Big Chill
A Weighty Problem
The Brave Turtle
The Dare
The Great Escape
The Carnival
The Missing Princess
Lunch Power
The Angel Fish
Ester's Fear


==== Season 2 ====
The Matchmaker
The New Princess
The Dancing
Bad Vibrations
Rumours
Battle of the Bands
The Runaway Grandmother
The Bad Princess
The Sick Dolphin
Size Matters
Polvina the Teacher
The Pirates
A Little Help
A Big Mess
Marcello's Friend
The Mural
The Forbidden Reef
The Accident
The Birds
The Ring
The Whale Watchers
The Guardians
Friends Forever
The Secret Admirer
Princess Poutalot
The Piano Lesson
Shark Love
The Twins
The Treasure
The Giant Starfish
Magic
The Seaweed Potion
The Itchy Wrists
The Bite
The Surprise Party
Grow Up
What's Cooking
The Ester Breakout
The Ungrateful Fish
The Too-Playful Shark
The Scare
Deep Freeze
The Sweet Talker
The Sea Quake
The Spidercrabs
The True Princess
The Crack of Doom
The Healer
The Guilty
The Number Crunchers
Beauty
The Last One


== References ==


== External links ==
Animated series' site
Animated series' site (in Spanish)