Qala (Music from the Netflix Film) is the soundtrack for the 2022 film of the same name. It was released on 11 November 2022 by Sony Music India. The album features six tracks, five composed by Amit Trivedi, with the sixth track guest-composed by Sagar Desai, who also scored the film's background music.
The lyrics were written by Amitabh Bhattacharya, Swanand Kirkire, Varun Grover, Kausar Munir, and Anvitaa Dutt, with excerpts from Sant Kabir's poems. Because the film is set in the 1940s, Dutt and Trivedi used classical instrumentation to reflect that period. The album received positive reviews.


== Background ==
Qala is set in the 1940s, during the early days of the Hindi film industry. Trivedi aimed to create melodies that felt authentic to vintage Hindi film music, yet appealing to contemporary listeners. He studied the works of C. Ramchandra, S. D. Burman, and Naushad to inform his compositions. His focus was on doing justice to Dutt's story, describing it as "a mother-daughter story, and there [was] a real haunting quality to it".
In an interview with Swati Chopra of The Quint, when asked about the soundtrack's inspiration from Guru Dutt's filmography, Dutt stated, "We never specifically talked about any particular director or composer while working on the songs, because we didn't want anybody to be influenced. We only spoke about the character and the story."
The songs were composed in three days during a Goa staycation with Dutt and lyricist Swanand Kirkire. Trivedi acknowledged the difficulty of composing in retro-classical styles but completed the score in a short time. The script narration took one day, and scoring took two. He also mentioned that he almost abandoned the project before finishing it.
To suit the early 1940s setting, the soundtrack avoided electronic instruments, using accordion, tabla, dholak, rebab, and sitar. The songs were sung by Sireesha Bhagavatula and Shahid Mallya, for Tripti Dimri and Babil Khan's characters, respectively. Mallya described the experience as "a golden opportunity". Bengaluru-based musician Iman Das contributed additional vocals to two tracks.


== Songs ==
Dutt and Trivedi drew inspiration for the songs from the film's narrative. The ballad "Shauq" depicts the relationship between Qala's mother and a record executive. Dutt visualized the scene with the characters in a boat at night, the Howrah Bridge visible.
"Phero Na Najariya" is described as a song of redemption for Qala, and "Nirbhau Nirvair" portrays the competition between Qala and Jagan. "Udh Jayega" features imagery of death and freedom, playing after Jagan's death. 
Firstpost writer Deepansh Duggal interpreted "Ghodey Pe Sawaar" as a critique of stalking in Hindi songs. It depicts Qala's rebellion. Trivedi used the accordion to evoke O. P. Nayyar's "Piya Piya Piya Mera Jiya Pukare". Anushka Sharma, the film's producer, had a cameo in the song.
"Rubaiyaan" was recorded but not included in the final film.


== Track listing ==


== Reception ==
Qala received positive feedback, with some praising it as one of 2022's best soundtracks. Deepansh Duggal noted that "the music is a character...There are times when it acts like an oracle prophesying future events". Vipin Nair stated that "Anvitaa Dutt makes up for the lack of songs in her [previously-released] debut movie with style!".
Manjeet Singh of Leisure Byte called the music "the core element of the film". Bhavya Sadhwani of India Times described the songs as "original and authentic". Anish Mohanty of Planet Bollywood felt that "Qala serves as a reminder of how Amit Trivedi is a gifted composer". Roktim Rajpal of India Today offered a more mixed review, stating that "Amit Trivedi tunes prove to be a mixed bag".
The soundtrack was praised by some new-age listeners for its "transcendental music and lyrics". "Ghodey Pe Sawaar" gained popularity, leading to cover versions by fans and celebrities, including Madhuri Dixit. A fan-made male version by Jainam Barot received mixed reactions.


== Accolades ==


== References ==