Rakshit Shetty (born 6 June 1983) is an Indian actor and filmmaker working predominantly in Kannada cinema. He is the recipient of one National Film Award, two Filmfare Awards South, two Karnataka State Film Awards and five SIIMA Awards. He debuted with the film Namm Areal Ond Dina (2010) and got his breakthrough with Simple Agi Ondh Love Story and further shot to fame with the cult Blockbuster Ulidavaru Kandanthe (2014) and further established himself as a lead actor in Godhi Banna Sadharana Mykattu (2015), Kirik Party (2016), Avane Srimannarayana (2019), 777 Charlie (2022), and Sapta Saagaradaache Ello – Side A (2023), with 777 Charlie becoming the highest-grossing film of his career.
Shetty is widely regarded as "Simple Star" for his style of filmmaking. He owns the production and distribution company named Paramvah Studios.


== Early life ==
Shetty was born in Udupi on 6 June 1983 in a Tulu-speaking Bunt family. He completed his schooling at his hometown. During his schooling days he was an avid Pili Nalike dancer, a folk dance in the Tulu Nadu region. 
This made him provide a major role for the dancers in his 2014 film Ulidavaru Kandanthe. Before starting his movie career, he completed his Bachelor's degree in Electronics and Communications Engineering at N.M.A.M. Institute of Technology, Nitte, Karkala which is part of Nitte (Deemed to be University). After graduating, he worked as a software professional for two years before becoming an actor starting in theatre.


== Career ==


=== Debut and breakthrough (2010-2015) ===
Shetty made his acting debut as a parallel lead with Nam Areal Ond Dina (2010) directed by Aravind Kaushik. The film starred debutants Anish Tejeshwar and Meghana Gaonkar in lead roles. Though the filming was commenced in 2008, the film underwent several struggles and huddles and released in July 2010. Though critics acclaimed the film for its non-linear narration, it didn't garner much popularity or success to Shetty. Following this debut, Shetty again collaborated with Aravind Kaushik and Meghana Gaonkar in his next release, Tuglak (2012). He essayed the role of Raaghu, an angry young man and garnered positive reviews from critics for his performance. However, the film was criticized for its screenplay and direction. The film also had actor Rishab Shetty in a pivotal role.
Shetty's big breakthrough came with the romance-comedy film Simple Agi Ondh Love Story (2013) directed by Simple Suni and co-starred Shwetha Srivatsav. The film turned out to be a major box-office success and also got critical acclaim. The film's success gave stardom to Shetty and he was fondly called as "Simple Star" and director Sunil Kumar being called "Simple Suni". Following this success, Shetty debuted as a director and screenwriter neo-noir gangster film Ulidavaru Kandanthe (2014). The film was the first in Kannada to be shot entirely in sync sound technology. Upon release, the movie was praised for its regional authenticity in depicting Tulu Nadu and its people. Shetty won multiple awards including Karnataka State Film Award for Director's First Time Best Film and  Filmfare Award for Best Director – Kannada for his direction The film holds a cult following, and thus has become a part of new-age generation Kannada cinema. Following this, in the same year Shetty did a cameo role in Suni's directorial Bahuparak with Srinagar Kitty in the lead role.


=== Critical acclaim and continued success (2015-present) ===
Shetty began the year 2015 by coming out of his friends' circle and teaming up with the popular commercial director Yogaraj Bhat for the satire comedy film Vaastu Prakaara co-starring Jaggesh. Following this, Shetty appeared in a cameo as himself in the film Jaathre.
In 2016, Shetty played the title role in the romantic thriller Ricky, a directorial debut film of his friend Rishab Shetty. The film was a commercial success and Shetty was appreciated for his powerful performance. This was followed by the critical success Godhi Banna Sadharana Mykattu (2016). Shetty achieved further success with the 2016 college drama Kirik Party which he wrote and produced, it was a critical and commercial success. In 2022, Shetty was seen in 777 Charlie, with his co-star, Charlie, a Labrador; Shetty produced 777 Charlie with the direction of Kiranraj K, under Paramvah Studios and opposite with Sangeetha Sringeri. It was released on 10 June 2022. The shooting process of this film took more than five years. The film focuses on the relationship between pets and pet lovers. In 2023, he starred in Sapta Sagaradaache Ello directed by Hemanth Rao and co-starred Rukmini Vasanth. The film was split into two parts with separate release dates.


== Personal life ==
Shetty began dating his co-star Rashmika Mandanna during the making of Kirik Party, and the couple got engaged on 3 July 2017 in a private ceremony in her hometown of Virajpet. The couple mutually broke off their engagement in September 2018, citing compatibility issues.


== In the media ==

Shetty's performance in Ulidavaru Kandanthe is regarded as one of the "100 Greatest Performances of the Decade" by Film Companion. He was named the Bangalore Times' Most Desirable Men in 2017. Further, Shetty was placed 2nd in 2018, 3rd in 2019 and 11th in 2020.
Shetty has been credited by the media for having begun a new wave of filmmaking in Kannada cinema. Through his unconventional body of works, he has established himself as one of the prominent film makers in the Kannada film industry.


== Filmography ==


=== As actor ===


=== Other crew positions ===


== Accolades ==

Shetty is a recipient of three Filmfare Awards South — Best Director – Kannada for Ulidavaru Kandanthe (2014), Best Actor Critics – Kannada for Kirik Party (2016), and Best Actor – Kannada for Sapta Saagaradaache Ello – Side A & Sapta Saagaradaache Ello – Side B (2023).


== Controversies ==


=== Regarding the film Kirik Party ===

Lahari Velu, the director of Lahari Music, had accused his banner Paramvah Studios of copyright infringement when his film Kirik Party was due for release.  In his complaint, Velu claimed that the song 'Hey Who Are You' is similar to 'Madhya Raatrili', a Shanti Kranti film song by V. Ravichandran and owned by Velu.
Apart from him, Lahari Velu and her company Paramva Studios and the film's music director Ajaneesh Loknath have also filed a copyright infringement complaint. Due to these accusations of Velu, he was heavily trolled by Rakshit fans.  Kirik Party was released without the song, but the film's producers were allowed to reintroduce the song in the film after they deposited Rs 10 lakh in court. He claims that he and the makers won the copyright infringement case but never made it public.  However, in 2020, a non-bailable warrant was issued against him and Ajaneesh after they failed to appear when the court summoned them.
According to Deccan Chronicle, when asked to respond to the allegations, he denied the allegation and said, "We have not copied even a single note of the song. Hamsalekha and Ravichandran have inspired me since childhood. That's why we dedicated the song to them. We both understand each other's point of view."


=== Regarding the movie Bachelor Party ===

The issue started when MRT Music, a renowned music label, accused he and his Paramvah Studios of using 2 songs 'Nyaya Ellide' and 'Omme Ninannu Kantumbha' from 'Nyaya Ellide' and  'Gaalimaathu' films respectively in this movie without permission. Naveen Kumar, partner of MRT Music, filed a complaint, highlighting that the music was used without proper licence, leading to a copyright infringement case against Rakshit Shetty.
As per a report by Pinkvilla the Delhi High Court took note of the situation and issued a notice to Rakshit Shetty and Paramvah Studios after they failed to appear in court. The court also ordered the immediate removal of the social media post in which the production house had defended its actions. The court’s ruling on August 12, 2024, was clear: Rakshit Shetty and Paramvah Studios must pay Rs 20 lakh as compensation to MRT Music for the unauthorized use of their songs.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Rakshit Shetty at IMDb