Chaduvukunna Ammayilu (transl. Educated Girls) is a 1963 Indian Telugu-language drama film directed by Adurthi Subba Rao. It stars Akkineni Nageswara Rao, Savitri, Krishna Kumari with music composed by S. Rajeswara Rao. It was produced by D. Madhusudhana Rao under the Annapurna Pictures banner. The film is based on the Telugu novel Kaalaatheetha Vyakthulu, written by Dr. Sridevi. The film was recorded as a Super Hit at the box office.


== Plot ==
The film begins with two soulmates, Sujatha & Vasantha. Sujatha is the daughter of the wealthy Raghunatha Rao, and Vasantha is a postmaster Rangaiah’s granddaughter. Rangaiah lives in their village with his wife, Mahalakshmi, who aims to civilize Vasantha. Once, the besties acquaint an intelligent guy, Shekar, a bank employee, in an accident, and he saves them from a sentence. From there, the three of them develop a good intimacy. The two beauties fall for Shekar but reciprocate for Vasantha. Indeed, Shekar lodges at a hostel owned by Brahmanandam Rangaiah’s ally, where various bachelors reside. Anand, a reprobate, the mate of Shekar, is among them. Currently, Vasantha walks on to their village where she meets Latha, her native & mutual friend to Sujatha. Simultaneously, Shekar lands therein on duty to auction Rangaiah’s property for his debt of bank loan. Being aware of him as Vasantha’s grandfather, Shekar attempts to bar it but fails when Brahmanandam secures his honor. During that quandary, Sujatha shelters Vasantha to reduce the Rangaiah’s burden.
Meanwhile, Latha escapes from an unwilling wedding and approaches her friends, who aid her. Yet, her sibling takes a stab to grab her when Shekar shields her but gets beaten hard. Anand introduces Lata via Shekar and snares her into love. At one point, Rangaiah visits the city when he falls victim to a heart attack, and Mahalakshmi also reaches Sujatha’s house. Therein, all are humiliated by Sujatha’s mischievous aunt, after which they quit. Shekar then accompanies and supports them in their hostel. Following this, Sujatha figures out Shekar’s endearment for Vasantha, who chooses and marries a policeman, Prabhakar. Besides, Anand, who has his eye on Vasantha, manipulates Mahalakshmi and makes her get a bad impression of Shekar in order to elevate his reputation in her thoughts.
Parallelly, Rangaiah’s condition is critical, and Shekar decides to admit him to a nursing home. Due to year-end audits, Shekar entrusts the responsibility to Anand and also asks Anand to sell his motorcycle to pay for the treatment. Anand sells the bike, but keeps the money. He lies to Shekar that the buyer will pay later and compels a pressured Shekar to steal cash from the bank to pay for Rangaiah's treatment. Anand flees when Shekar is accused & entangled, so he absconds, which results in Rangaiah’s death. Prabhakar takes up the case, and everyone, including Vasantha, believes Shekar is the offender. Sujatha feels something fishy and tries to protect Shekar when a rift arises between the couple. Next, Anand covertly takes Latha on a tour and keeps her in a hotel, and spreads a rumor that Shekar has eloped with her. Shekar reaches the hotel and reveals Anand's true colors to Latha, who then despises Anand for his betrayal. Plus, he plots to knit Vasantha. Just before the wedding happens, Shekar enters the venue and freaks out trying to expose Anand, but Prabhakar arrests him. Latha appears at the venue and, along with Sujatha, tactically emerges Anand’s cabal, proving Shekar as nonguilty. Subsequently, Anand is taken into custody. At last, the judiciary acquits Shekar; Anand pays a short-term penalty and regretfully pleads for pardon. Finally, the movie ends happily with the marriage of Shekar & Vasantha.


== Cast ==
Akkineni Nageshwara Rao as Sekhar
Savitri as Sujatha
Krishna Kumari as Vasantha
Gummadi as Venkata Rangayya
Relangi as Bramhanandayya
Padmanabham as Anand
Sobhan Babu as Prabhakar
Allu Ramalingaiah as Bank Agent
Vinnakota Ramanna Panthulu as Raghunath Rao.
Suryakantham as Vardhanamma
Hemalatha as Mahalakshmamma
E. V. Saroja as Latha


== Crew ==
Art: G. V. Subba Rao
Choreography: Pasumarti
Dialogues: Tripuraneni Gopichand
Playback: Ghantasala, P. Susheela, P. B. Srinivas, Madhavapeddi Satyam, Swarnalatha, Ashalatha Kulkarni
Lyrics: C. Narayana Reddy, Dasaradhi, Arudra, Kosaraju
Associate Director: K. Viswanath
Story: Dr. Sridevi
Screenplay: D. Madhusudhana Rao, Adurthi Subba Rao, K. Viswanath
Music: S. Rajeswara Rao
Editor: T. Krishna
Cinematography: P. S. Selvaraj
Producer: D. Madhusudhana Rao
Director: Adurthi Subba Rao
Banner: Annapurna Pictures
Release Date: 10 April 1963


== Music ==

Music was composed by S. Rajeswara Rao. 


== Release & Reception ==
Chaduvukunna Ammayilu was released on 10 April 1963. Despite facing competition from Lava Kusa, the film ran for 100 days in theatres.


== References ==


== External links ==
Chaduvukunna Ammayilu at IMDb
Chaduvukunna Ammayilu film review at Cinegoer.com