Samajavaragamana is a 2023 Indian Telugu-language comedy drama film directed by Ram Abbaraju from a story written by Bhanu Bogavarapu. It is produced by Razesh Danda  under the banners, Ak Entertainments and Hasya Movies. It stars Sree Vishnu, Reba Monica John, Naresh, Srikanth Iyyengar, Vennela Kishore, Sudarshan, and Devi Prasad.
It was released on 29 June 2023 to highly positive reviews from the critics and audience praising the cast's performances. The film was a commercial success at the box office.  


== Plot ==
Bala Subramanyam "Balu" is a responsible middle-class son who works as a ticketing clerk at a multiplex in Hyderabad, Telangana. He is the sole breadwinner of his loving family and despises romantic love. His father, Uma Maheswara Rao, has been attempting to earn his bachelor's degree, to get his ancestral property but to no avail.
According to his grandfather's will, they will inherit a huge amount of money contingent upon his father's graduation. Through his father, Balu meets Sarayu, who is also poor in studies and is attempting to pass her supplementary exams. She eventually becomes a paying guest in Balu's home. Balu takes up the responsibility of tutoring his father and Sarayu in a sequence of funny events.
Soon, Balu and Sarayu fall in love. Sarayu clears her degree and returns to her hometown. A problem arises for the couple when Balu and Sarayu go to an engagement. What is the problem? How do they get out of it? These questions form the plot.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==
The film score and soundtrack album are composed by Gopi Sunder. The first single titled "What To Do" was released on April 21 2023. The second single titled "Humsafar" was released on June 15 2023. The third single titled "Hola Re Hola" was released on June 21, 2023.


== Release ==
The film was set to release on May 18, 2023, but was delayed due to post-production works in progress. It was finally released on June 29, 2023. The digital rights of the film were acquired by Aha. It streamed on Aha on July 28, 2023. The film clocked 100 million streaming minutes in 24 hrs.


== Critical reception ==
Samajavaragamana received positive reviews from critics.
123Telugu gave 3.25 out of 5 stars and wrote "Samajavaragamana is a hilarious and engaging family entertainer with decent performances from Sree Vishnu, Naresh, and Reba Monica. 
Abhilasha Cherukuri of Cinema Express gave 3.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "Samajavaragamana’s writing really makes one wonder. It is consistent with its comedy while managing to deliver its intended message effectively.
Paul Nicodemus of The Times of India gave 3 out of 5 stars and wrote "Samajavaragamana is a recommended watch for those seeking an entertaining cinematic experience that will leave you with a smile on your face".
 
Venkat Arikatla of Greatandhra rated the film 3 out of 5 stars and wrote "Samajavaragamana is a family entertainer with both funny and romantic parts. However, Sree Vishnu has always been good at playing middle-class young roles. He has superb comic timing. After a long wait, he landed a role that was right in his wheelhouse, and he nailed it with ease. Reba Monika looks suited for the role.


== References ==


== External links ==
Samajavaragamana on Aha
Samajavaragamana at IMDb