The Gounamitz River is a tributary of the head of the Restigouche River, flowing in the Northwest of New Brunswick, in Canada.
The course of Gounamitz river crosses:

Madawaska County: Rivière-Verte, Sainte-Anne Parish
Restigouche County: Saint-Quentin Parish;
Victoria County: Drummond Parish.


== Geography ==
The Gounamitz River rises at the confluence of the North Branch Gounamitz River and West Branch Gounamitz River. This source is located in the Rivière-Verte Parish, in Madawaska County.
This source is located at:

2.6 kilometres (1.6 mi) South of the southern boundary of the Saint-Quentin Parish;
24.0 kilometres (14.9 mi) East of the confluence of Lake First;
29.9 kilometres (18.6 mi) Southwest of the confluence of the Little Main Restigouche River which is the head of the Restigouche River;
21.6 kilometres (13.4 mi) Northwest from the confluence of the Gounamitz river;
36.6 kilometres (22.7 mi) East of the southern boundary of the Quebec.
Gounamitz river flows in forest zone, more or less in parallel in the southwest side to the Kedgwick River.
From the source, "Gounamitz river" flows on 28.0 kilometres (17.4 mi), according to these segments:

4.6 kilometres (2.9 mi) Eastward in the Rivière-Verte Parish, (Madawaska County) up to Cyr stream (from the West);
2.8 kilometres (1.7 mi) Eastward up to Dave Richards Brook (from the West);
1.7 kilometres (1.1 mi) Eastward to the edge of the Saint-Quentin (Restigouche County);
2.5 kilometres (1.6 mi) to the East in the Saint-Quentin up to "Balm of Gilead Brooke" (from the West);
4.5 kilometres (2.8 mi) to the Southeast, up to Big Brook (from the West);
1.5 kilometres (0.93 mi) to the Southeast receiving the waters of Falls Brook (from the Southwest) to the boundary of the Sainte-Anne Parish;
4.5 kilometres (2.8 mi) to the southeast, to the limit of the Drummond Parish (Victoria County, New Brunswick);
5.9 kilometres (3.7 mi). To the south east, to the confluence of the Gounamitz River 
The "Gounamitz River" pours on the Northwest shore of the Little Main Restigouche River, in the Drummond Parish, Victoria County, New Brunswick.
The confluence of the "Gounamitz River" is located at:

18.3 kilometres (11.4 mi) Southwest of the confluence of the Kedgwick River and Little Main Restigouche River;
17.4 kilometres (10.8 mi) West of the village center of Saint-Quentin;
24.7 kilometres (15.3 mi) Southwest of the village center of Kedgwick;
65.0 kilometres (40.4 mi) East of downtown of Edmundston;
93.1 kilometres (57.8 mi) Southwest of the Campbellton, New Brunswick bridge, crossing the Restigouche River.


== See also ==

Restigouche County
Victoria County, New Brunswick
List of rivers of New Brunswick
Gulf of Saint Lawrence
Restigouche River
Little Main Restigouche River
North Branch Gounamitz River
West Branch Gounamitz River
Rivière-Verte Parish
Saint-Quentin Parish
Saint-Quentin Parish
Drummond Parish


== References ==


== External links ==

Website: Restigouche.org - Watershed Management Council of the Restigouche River Inc. - Restigouche River Watershed Management Council Inc.