Rev. James Robinson (March 21, 1753 – March 27, 1868) was an American preacher and soldier. Born on the Eastern Shore of Maryland into bondage on March 21, 1753, his enslaver was Francis De Shields. Robinson served under the General Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette and would become a significant African American soldier in the American Revolutionary War.


== Revolutionary War service ==
Robinson's enslaver, Francis De Shields, had him enlist at age 24 and fight in a Virginia Light Infantry Regiment with the promise that he could earn his freedom. His regiment was one of several African American regiments under the command of the General Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette. He fought in the Battle of Brandywine which was a British victory. Also White Haven, Roanoke River, Ragged Point, on Dorset County River, Vienna Ferry, and Cambridge. On October 14, 1781, he led the charge of 400 American troops up British redoubt #10 at the Siege of Yorktown and he attacked and defeated three British soldiers at once and the redoubt was captured. General Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette, was so impressed with his actions that he awarded Robinson a Gold Medal of Valor. This would make him the highest decorated African American veteran of the Revolutionary War. He was one of between 5,000 and 10,000 African Americans who served on the American side in the Revolutionary War.


== War of 1812 service ==
After the Revolutionary War, De Shields reneged on his promise to free Robinson and sold him in New Orleans back into slavery in Louisiana. His new master Calvin Smith was cruel and unforgiving, according to Robinson. His cousin was whipped, salted, and put in the stocks, dying from the trauma within a week of being brought to Smith's Second Creek plantation in the Natchez District. Soon thereafter, Andrew Jackson traveled to Smith's to enlist 500 enslaved men to prepare for the Battle of New Orleans. Roberts was one of these 500 men.

During an engagement, one of Robinson's fingers was shot off in battle. Also, at some point, he was struck by a saber in the head, leaving a scar he would carry his whole life. After the American victory, soldiers gathered around General Andrew Jackson, and he announced that the enslaved men who had fought would not be freed after all. According to Robinson in a slave narrative he dictated shortly before the American Civil War, Jackson lectured his fellow white officers on the perpetuation of slavery in America:"Never," said he, "suffer negroes to have arms; if you do, they will take the country. Suffer them to have no kind of weapons over ten inches long. Never allow them to have a piece of paper with any writing on it whatever. You must examine your slaves very closely, for the time is coming when the slave will get light; and if ever his mind is enlightened on the subject of freedom, you cannot keep him. One slave bought from the East will ruin a multitude of those raised here. Before a slave of mine should go free, I would put him in a barn and burn him alive. Gentlemen, take me at my word; for if you do not, you will be sorry for it before many years. Never arm another set of colored people. We have fooled them now, but never trust them again; they will not be fooled again with this example before them. If you do, you will repent of it but once."Robinson thought about taking his gun and shooting General Andrew Jackson right then and there but decided against it.


== Later life ==

In 1825, Robinson once again met Lafayette during his return tour of the United States. Robinson obtained his freedom in the 1830s, and became an ordained minister. According to the 1840 and 1850 U.S. Censuses, he was living in Butler County, Ohio with his wife Curtilda. They had two sons, Alexander and Wesley Sr. Wesley would go on to serve in the American Civil War in the 102nd United States Colored Infantry Regiment. According to the 1860 U.S. Census, Robinson and his family had moved to and were living in Detroit. Robinson wrote The Narrative of James Roberts, a slave narrative about his life using the assumed name of James Roberts. At the time of Robinson's death, he lived at 137 East Fort Street in Detroit. Robinson's family lived at 136 W. Lafayette Blvd in Detroit, which is now a private park called Lafayette Greens. In the 1860s, Roberts lived in Detroit.
Robinson died in Detroit on March 27, 1868, at the age of 115. During his funeral, large crowds gathered to watch. He was the last living African American veteran of the Revolutionary War at the time and the oldest person buried in Elmwood Cemetery. His last known living descendant was Gertrude Robinson, his granddaughter, who died in Ohio in 1983.


== Military honors at last ==

On June 22, 2019, a joint grave marking ceremony was held at Elmwood Cemetery by the Michigan societies of the Sons of the American Revolution and General Society of the War of 1812. Military honors with assistance from the American Legion were conducted 151 years after his death. Many dignitaries spoke including U.S. Representative Rashida Tlaib and Maj. Gen. Leonard Isabelle of the Michigan Air National Guard and Sen. Gary Peters provided a letter that was read. Tlaib had read Robinson's achievements into the U.S. Congressional Record and presented a certificate which was sent to the National Mall Liberty Fund D.C. The National Mall Liberty Fund D.C. is working to build the National Liberty Memorial, which will memorialize the African American contribution to Independence.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Greene, James M. (2017). "Military Service and Racial Subjectivity in the War Narratives of James Roberts and Isaac Hubbell". Warring for America. University of North Carolina Press. doi:10.5149/northcarolina/9781469631516.003.0007. ISBN 978-1-4696-3151-6.