The 2023 Wanneroo bushfire was a bushfire that began on 22 November 2023 in Wanneroo, 36 kilometres (22 miles) north of the Perth central business district, in the City of Wanneroo, Western Australia. 
Eighteen houses were destroyed as a result of the fire and several people in the suburb were evacuated from their homes.
The fire destroyed over 1,900 hectares (4,700 acres) of land, including farms and residential buildings in Wanneroo as of 28 November.


== Background ==
On 22 November 2023, news articles stated that Western Australia should be prepared for a five-day heatwave throughout the state, reaching over 40 °C (104 °F) from 22 November 2023. The exact cause of the fire is yet to be determined. At that stage, no foul play or arson was suspected by state police.


== List of affected suburbs ==
Ashby
Banksia Grove (severely affected)
Carramar
Jandabup
Mariginiup (severely affected)
Melaleuca
Sinagra
Wanneroo (severely affected)
Wangara
Tapping (severely affected)


== Timeline ==


=== 22 November ===
The fire began near the bushland at the intersection of Boundary Road in Mariginiup at around 1:00 p.m. Weather conditions were harsh, with temperatures peaking close to 40 °C during the day, and wind gusts of up to 41 km/h recorded.  The fire moved quickly in a westerly direction and was not contained or controlled. More than 120 firefighting personnel were on-site tackling the blaze. Bushfire emergency warnings were in place for residents in the area bounded by Coogee Road, Joondalup Drive, Pinjar Road, Caporn Street, Garden Park Drive, Dundebar Road, Trichet Road, Hawkins Road, Ross Street, Warbrook Road, Silver Road, Townsend Road, and Rousset Road in parts of Banksia Grove, Jandabup, Mariginiup, Melaleuca, and Wanneroo in the cities of Wanneroo and Swan. Bushfire Watch and Act warnings were set in place for the surrounding parts of Jandabup, Mariginiup, and Melaleuca. Residents east of Franklin Road were advised that it was too late to leave and needed to shelter in a room away from the fire front. Those in the emergency warning area west of Franklin Road were advised to leave now in a westerly direction if the way is clear.  Residents in the Watch and Act area were also being advised to leave now unless they were prepared and planned to actively defend their homes. An evacuation center for displaced residents was established at the Wanneroo Recreation Centre.
The Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) forecast strong wind gusts of up to 70 km/h overnight, as well as temperatures of more than 32 °C. The fire was still burning rapidly and was hard to control by 10 pm.


=== 23 November ===
The bushfire was still unsettled overnight and had firefighters and police officers blocking roads in Wanneroo, causing emergency restrictions on major road intersections. Australia Post cancelled all deliveries to the areas affected by the bushfire. By midday, firefighters found the bushfire to begin burning again rapidly and faster, resulting in more than 100 firefighters being called.
Wind gusts of up to 65 km/h were forecast for the afternoon by BOM, with high temperatures of 40 °C continuing.
At 1:00 pm, multiple sheds being burned down in the suburb of Tapping were reported by the news.
At 2:30 pm, news reports from the firefighters announced that residents located in the area bound by Castledene Way, Da Vinci Drive, Ashley Road, Pinjar Road, Saponara Drive, Rhoeo Outlook, Vincent Road, Garden Park Drive, Belgrade Road, Amos Road, High Road, Quarkum Street, Elliot Road, Lenore Road, Franklin Road, Trichet Road, Hawkins Road, Wirrega Road, Galah Road, Silver Road, Coogee Road, Tumbleweed Drive, and Joondalup Drive are in danger and to possibly be requested to evacuate from their homes immediately. Reports also stated that two schools in the Wanneroo area were forcefully shut down and evacuated including Wanneroo Secondary College within the City of Wanneroo.
At 10:00 pm, news reports stated that more than 1700 acres of land, wild bushes and housing properties had been burned down and urged residents in suburbs such as Ashby, Banksia Grove, Carramar, Jandabup, Mariginiup, Melaleuca, Sinagra and Tapping to evacuate. Firefighters also stated that the bushfire would likely not be controlled for days.


=== 24 November ===
As of 24 November, at 8:00 am, the fire was somewhat stable and under control by the Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) stated that wind directions were "favourable" to help shut down the fire. However, the fire remained active throughout the day.
At 3:00 pm, Premier Roger Cook confirmed that overnight another eight housing properties were burnt down bringing the total up to 18 destroyed homes in Wanneroo. Firefighters also said the upcoming hot days will not be favourable for putting out the fire and is highly likely to get worse again over the next two days.


=== 25 November ===
At 2:40 pm, Premier Roger Cook confirmed no more homes had been lost in the bushfire.
At 3:00 pm, DFES stated that lives and homes were under threat, but just after midday on the 26th the alert level was downgraded to a 'watch and act' due to the fire being contained, but not yet controlled. As well as this, the Bureau of Meteorology issued a severe weather warning, saying damaging wind gusts of up to 90 km/h were likely to develop over parts of the lower west and south west districts late on the evening of the 25th, before easing mid-morning on the 26th. Even though contained, WA's Emergency Services Minister Stephen Dawson said crews remained on high alert. People whose homes have been destroyed or severely damaged will be eligible for a $4,000 payment, while those whose homes suffered minor damage may be eligible for a $2,000 payment from the government.


=== 26 November ===
At 9:00 am, DFES stated that dozens of homes in Western Australia had been damaged or completely destroyed by fire as authorities warned residents to remain alert. Around 18 homes have been lost and another 30 have been damaged. Firefighters contained the blaze overnight, but residents have been warned that conditions can change at any time, with a Watch and Act alert in place for those in Jandabup, Melaleuca, Wanneroo and Mariginiup. About 100 power poles were damaged by the fires and the community was warned it could be two weeks before electricity is restored to some areas. The people also are being asked by Premier Roger Cook to not return to their homes, as the roads are still unsafe due to fallen power lines, unsafe ground, and fallen trees.
At 3:40 pm, DFES confirmed that the Wanneroo bushfire had been contained and controlled. DFES downgraded the fire to a Bushfire Advice for the suburbs that were at one point in the evacuation zone. DFES spokesperson Clint Kuchel said that there had been no change overnight in the fire size, or the estimates of 18 homes destroyed, with about 130 firefighters remaining at the fire to keep it under control and contained within the containment lines. Kuchel also said that 280 homes were saved with the help of the firefighters, stating that all roads are now open, except the ones with hazards, and that an estimated 150 homes are still without power. On 29 December, the cause of the bushfire was released publicly by the DFES in their investigation, which stated that it was started by a subterranean/ground fire.


== References ==