Robert Philip Orlando  also known as Bobby Orlando or just Bobby O, is an American record producer, indie record label owner, songwriter, and musician. He is regarded as an innovator in the Hi-NRG genre for developing his signature sound, using a "powerful beat" and "new wave-style" vocals with the help of a "heavy [synthesizer] bass", synthesizers, piano, guitars, cowbells. His most recent releases 'Satisfaction' 'No Surrender' 'Tyranny' Released July 2024 


== Early life ==
The son of a suburban New York schoolteacher, Orlando declined a classical music scholarship to pursue his then current musical interest, glam rock. In the late 1970s, his professional interests turned to disco and shortly thereafter, he established his own record label, "O" Records.


== Music career ==
Bobby Orlando has been active as music producer, songwriter, musician, and record label impresario.
Orlando is credited as one of the founding fathers of Hi-NRG dance music. His productions are easily identifiable by their dense synthesizers, rolling bass lines, and resounding percussion.  He has played multiple instruments on his tracks including electronic keyboards, guitars, bass, synthesizers, drums, piano, assorted percussion, trumpet and saxophone. The ringing cowbell percussion lines and robotic sequencers heard in "She Has a Way", "The Best Part of Breakin' Up" and "Native Love (Step by Step)" have been described as defining his trademark sound.
As a solo artist, Bobby O scored hits with tracks "She Has a Way", "How to Pick Up Girls", "Suspicious Minds", and "I'm So Hot for You". He created his project concept The Flirts, to further front his performances as an artist, musician and songwriter. With an ever revolving roster of female session singers and models, Orlando churned out the hits "Passion", "Danger", and "Helpless".  His association with underground film star Divine resulted in classic club anthems "Native Love (Step by Step)" (featuring Orlando's voice in the chorus), "Love Reaction", and "Shoot Your Shot". Orlando also produced The Fast, later to be known as Man 2 Man.
When Neil Tennant, then an assistant editor at Smash Hits, and later a member of Pet Shop Boys, was sent to interview the Police in 1983 in New York, he sought out Orlando. Both Tennant and fellow Pet Shop Boy Chris Lowe admired Orlando's sound and productions – "Passion" by the Flirts, being a particular favorite. Orlando decided to produce a Pet Shop Boys album and released their first two earliest 12-inch singles including the original 1984 version of "West End Girls" and "One More Chance". Orlando and the Pet Shop Boys recorded twelve tracks together, most of which never saw release, including the original versions of "It's a Sin", "Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)", and "I Get Excited".  
Orlando's songs frequently deal with philosophical themes such as "Try It (I'm in Love with a Married Man)", which was given a contemporary twist when it was re-recorded by Pet Shop Boys in 2003 (see Disco 3).  Many of Orlando's lyrics describe unrequited love, private despair, personal angst and a truth-seeking perspective.  Orlando frequently etched philosophical maxims into vinyl records featuring his songs; these adages being literally cut into the grooves near the "lead out" and "lock grooves" of the vinyl.
His music has appeared in numerous motion pictures, including A Nightmare on Elm Street 2: Freddy's Revenge, Wigstock: The Movie, Kiss Kiss Bang Bang, Valley Girl, Dark Mirror, Flying, High Risk, Rappin, Underground,'This Is The Night and Eric.
French electroclash duo Miss Kittin & the Hacker mention Orlando in their song "Walking in the Sunshine" from their 2001 release, First Album ("I love men like Bobby Orlando / The Flirts composer a long time ago / It makes me laugh a lot, you know / But I don't want to show").
Orlando has influenced various Eurodisco, tropical house, techno, Italo disco, electronic dance music ("EDM") and hi-NRG releases. He has been cited by music historians for his contribution to dance music.


== Production discography ==
Bobby Orlando productions:


=== Oh Romeo discography ===
Oh Romeo, was a concept group created by Bobby Orlando. Each release featured different session singers.

 1987
"Living Out A Fantasy"

The song "One More Shot" was also featured on the 1994 Avex Trax album Super Eurobeat Presents Hi-NRG '80s.
In 1991 the Hot Productions label released their greatest hits album, These Memories: The Best of Oh Romeo.


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Discogs Bobby Orlando Discography
MassiveDance2010: YouTube channel with recent releases