Florence Dauta Eshalomi (née Nosegbe; born 18 September 1980) is a British politician who has served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Vauxhall and Camberwell Green (formerly the Vauxhall constituency) since 2019. A Member of the Labour and Co-operative parties, she was Member of the London Assembly (AM) for Lambeth and Southwark from 2016 to 2021.  After the Vauxhall constituency was abolished she was elected as the MP for the newly created Vauxhall and Camberwell Green constituency in the 2024 general election.


== Early life ==
Born Florence Nosegbe in Birmingham, she is the daughter of Anthony Nosegbe and of Nigerian descent. She is a lifelong Brixton resident and the eldest of three girls from a single parent family. Her mother, the late Maria Da-Silva, worked as a school teacher until her illness forced her to retire early. Florence supported her mother, who suffered from sickle cell anaemia and kidney failure, as her carer.
Eshalomi attended local schools in Lambeth including Durand Primary (now Van Gogh) and St Helen's RC Primary school and Bishop Thomas Grant Secondary School. She completed her A-Levels at St Francis Xavier Sixth Form College in Clapham South. She is the first member of her family to go to university, graduating with a BA Hons in Political & International Studies with Law from Middlesex University. Florence benefited from the EU Funded 'Erasmus Student Exchange' and had the opportunity to study at Utrecht University for a semester.
Eshalomi started her working life as a 16-year-old at Sainsbury's supermarket, Clapham High Street. She has worked in a variety of campaigning and public affairs roles including in local government as a policy officer, as a regional organiser for the Labour Party during the 2005 general election and as the Public Affairs Manager for the UK's leading race equality think tank, the Runnymede Trust.


== Political career ==
Prior to winning her seat on the London Assembly, she worked for the PR agency Four Communications as a public affairs account manager.
Eshalomi served as a local councillor from Brixton Hill on Lambeth London Borough Council. She represented the ward along with future Labour MP Steve Reed.
Eshalomi has previously served as a member of the Progress Strategy Board. In 2016, The Times reported that "one of Momentum's most militant factions" planned to picket an event held to support Eshalomi's candidacy for the London Assembly. MPs including Chuka Umunna, Ben Bradshaw and Stella Creasy strongly criticised the picket, and a spokesperson for Momentum stated that the picket was organised by a separate group and that "Momentum are fully behind Flo's campaign." In the 2015 leadership election Eshalomi supported Liz Kendall to become Labour Party leader.
Eshalomi was elected to the London Assembly on 5 May 2016 with a majority of 62,243 over the Conservative Party candidate Robert Flint. She was lead spokesperson for the London Assembly Labour Group on Transport issues, and current Chair of the London Assembly Transport Committee.
As an Assembly Member, Eshalomi has campaigned on issues including gang crime and the closure of Kennington Police Station.
Eshalomi was selected as Labour candidate for the Vauxhall parliamentary constituency on 27 October 2019, after Kate Hoey, a long-standing MP of 30 years, had announced she would not stand again as Labour's candidate in the constituency. Eshalomi won the seat with a slightly reduced majority of 19,612 votes.
Eshalomi made her maiden speech in the House of Commons on 17 January 2020. She said that "I never imagined that almost five years to the day, as I was literally pacing up and down the maternity ward, looking over the river, trying to coerce my daughter to come out, I would now be sat in this Parliament fighting for funding for our hard-working doctors and nurses" in reference to St Thomas' Hospital in her Vauxhall constituency. Eshalomi also prioritised more funding for the NHS and Police, and to focus on tackling youth violence and young women facing sexual exploitation. On 14 April 2020, Eshalomi was promoted to the opposition front bench as a whip.
Eshalomi and her fellow black female MPs have frequently been mistaken for each other since entering parliament, with Eshalomi herself being twice mistaken for black female colleagues in the nine months since her election. Eshalomi said of the misidentifications that "The frequency is worrying and lends itself to a lazy racist view that all black people look the same". Eshalomi was wrongly identified as Taiwo Owatemi by BBC Parliament and a fellow MP ran up to her thinking she was Kate Osamor. During Eshalomi's time on the London Assembly, she was mistaken for Conservative Kemi Badenoch, then a fellow assembly member. Eshalomi wrote that "All those women I've referenced are individual politicians in their own right...They're women who fought to get elected. So they deserve to be named and not to be confused with other black women. This doesn't happen to some of my white female colleagues, who sometimes have their hair down, sometimes they'll have it back in a ponytail. So why is it, if we as black women change our hair or our appearance, you can't recognise us?"
On 30 December 2020, Eshalomi abstained on the Future Trade Agreement between the UK and the EU, resulting in her resignation as an opposition whip.
In May 2021, Eshalomi returned to the Labour front bench as the Parliamentary Private Secretary (PPS) to Angela Rayner, the Shadow First Secretary of State and Deputy Leader of the Labour Party.
In June 2021, a 59-year-old man from Brixton was prosecuted after sending a stream of abusive messages to Eshalomi between December 2020 and February 2021.
In the 2023 British shadow cabinet reshuffle, she was appointed Shadow Minister for Democracy.
In November 2023, Eshalomi abstained on an SNP motion for a King's Speech amendment calling for a ceasefire in Gaza. After the vote, she immediately clarified her support for a humanitarian ceasefire and has called for one in Parliament on several occasions.


== Personal life ==
Eshalomi married Matthew in 2014. They have two children, who were born at St Thomas' Hospital. She is a Christian, and attends Our Lady Of The Rosary Roman Catholic church in Brixton.


== Electoral history ==


=== 2024 general election ===


=== 2019 general election ===


=== 2016 London Assembly election ===


=== 2014 Lambeth London Borough Council election ===


=== 2010 Lambeth London Borough Council election ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Florence Eshalomi on Twitter
Profile at Parliament of the United Kingdom
Contributions in Parliament at Hansard
Voting record at Public Whip
Record in Parliament at TheyWorkForYou
"Florence Eshalomi MP – Assembly Member" Archived 1 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine, London Assembly.
"Councillor Florence Eshalomi" Archived 26 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Lambeth.