The Isaiah Projects is a ministry and charity organization, based in Powder Springs, Georgia, dedicated to creating educational tools in order to help Christians discover the Hebraic roots of their faith as well as providing food packages and humanitarian aid to individuals and families in need. It was founded in 2022 by Janet Cain (CEO), David Nekrutman (Executive director), Pastor Donna Taylor, and Marsha Conrad.


== History ==

The Isaiah Projects was founded in 2022 by Janet Cain (CEO), David Nekrutman (Executive director), Pastor Donna Taylor, and Marsha Conrad with the mission of educating Christians about the Hebraic origins of Christianity. The organization started out by focusing on three main topics; The first is Shabbat (The Sabbath) as a movement, its fulfillment of Messianic Prophecy and how it can be adopted and incorporated into one's life. The second is creating written resources about the Hebraic roots of Christianity. And the third is providing food packages and humanitarian aid to those in need.
In March 2022, the organization's first educational resource, Your Sabbath Invitation, was published.
In April 2023, The Isaiah Projects, together with Shmuel Bowman of Operation Lifeshield, spearheaded a fundraising campaign for the purchase of bomb shelters for kindergartens in the northern Israeli town of Shlomi situated on the border with Lebanon.
In 2023, the organization, together with Pastor Steven Khoury of "Holy Land Missions", led a humanitarian effort to save Dina, a Gazan woman whose husband was murdered over a property dispute. The organization helped to secure safe passage for Dina from Gaza to Bethlehem in the West Bank. When asked about the organization's part in rescuing Dina, CEO Janet Cain replied that care for the widow and the orphan is cemented in biblical scripture. In addition, Executive director, David Nekrutman, stated that "covenant land comes with covenant responsibility" and that helping others is part of the foundations on which he was raised.


=== Activity during 2023 Israel–Hamas war ===
On the morning of October 7, 2023, following the unexpected missile attack by Hamas on Israel and the subsequent reports of a massacre in the southern region and the resulting outbreak of war, The Isaiah Projects spearheaded an initiative to relocate and care for the needs of scores of people evacuated from the Gaza area. In cooperation with other Jewish and Christian organizations, members of The Isaiah Projects helped to evacuate nearly 50 families from the farming community of Moshav Mash'en to Jerusalem. The Isaiah Projects, along with members of the "Genesis 123" organization, led by Jonathan Feldstein, helped in recouping boarding expenses for around 60 people who were evacuated from the Gaza area to Jerusalem. In addition to addressing the immediate needs of evacuees from Gaza, The Isaiah Projects, in cooperation with "Bridges for Peace", vowed to provide 50 families with household appliances including sponsoring mental health sessions to those affected.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website