The Fire Devil (German: Der Feuerteufel) is a 1940 German historical adventure film directed by and starring Luis Trenker. It also featured Judith Holzmeister, Bertl Schultes and Hilde von Stolz. The title is sometimes translated as The Arsonist.
The film's sets were designed by the art directors Erich Grave and Ludwig Reiber. It was shot at the Bavaria Studios in Munich. Location shooting took place in Mittenwald, Schwäbisch Hall and North Tyrol. It premiered at the Ufa-Palast am Zoo in Berlin. Costing over a million reichsmarks to make, it easily recouped its production costs at the box office and was a considerable popular success.
It is set during the Tyrolean Rebellion against Napoleon, about which Trenker had previously made another film The Rebel in 1932. However Adolf Hitler, who had been an admirer of the previous film, was apparently displeased feeling that the parallels between Napoleon and the Third Reich meant that the film glorified and potentially incited popular revolt against the regime. To restore himself to favour, Trenker published his novel Captain Ladurner which was overtly pro-Nazi.


== Cast ==
Luis Trenker as Valentin Sturmegger
Judith Holzmeister as Maria Schmiederer
Bertl Schultes as Clemens Schmiederer
Hilde von Stolz as Marquise Antoinette de Chanel
Fritz Kampers as Kaptän Münzer
Franz Herterich as Kaiser Franz I. von Österreich
Ernst Fritz Fürbringer as Fürst von Metternich
Erich Ponto as Kaiser Napoleon Bonaparte
Claus Clausen as Major Ferdinand von Schill
Karl-Heinz Peters as Französischer Kommissar
Walter Ladengast as Rafael Kröss, Verräter
Ludwig Kerscher as Kluiber, Kärntner Bauer
Vera Hartegg as Magd
Ludwig Schmid-Wildy as Klotz, Kärntner Bauer
Friedrich Ulmer as Reintaler, Kärntner Bauer
Elise Aulinger as Schönleitnerin
Sepp Nigg as Zoppel, Bauer
Lore Schuetzendorf as Frau Schoenleitner
Kurt Meisel as Erzherzog Johann
Ferdinand Exl as Purtscheller, Kärntner Bauer
Paul Mederow as Rusca, französischer General
Reinhold Pasch as Henri Daru, französischer Oberst
Karl Fochler as Burron, französischer Offizier
Klaus Pohl as Kranewitter, Kärntner Bauer
Carl Balhaus as Kärntner Bauernbursche
Anton Färber as Kärntner Bauernbursche
Julius Eckhoff as Französischer Soldat
Karl Gelfius as Sänger
Luis Gerold as Holznagel, Bauer
Leopold Kerscher as Junger Bauernbursche
Robert Thiem as Offizier
Aruth Wartan as Knecht mit der Augenklappe


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
George L. Mosse. Fallen Soldiers: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wars. Oxford University Press, 1991.


== External links ==
The Fire Devil at IMDb