Augustin Andriamananoro (born 14 August 1968 in Soamahamanina, Madagascar) is the Executive Manager of the Presidency of Madagascar in charge of Presidential Projects. He is the former Minister of Halieutic Resources and Fisheries from June 2018 to January 2019.


== General Manager of the Presidency of Madagascar ==
After the last presidential election in Madagascar in December 2018, the President of Madagascar, Andry Rajoelina, named Andriamananoro the General Manager of the Presidency of Madagascar in charge of Presidential Projects. As the executive manager of presidential projects, Augustin Andriamananoro is in charge of implementation of projects in different sectors such as access to water and energy for all, food self-efficiency, education resources and structures, extractive sector development, sports and culture, tourism and protection of environment, health and well-being, and ICT's development.


== Minister of Halieutic Resources and Fisheries ==
Under the presidency of Hery Rajaonarimampianina, Andriamananoro was the Minister of Halieutic Resources and Fisheries from June 2018 to January 2019. During his term, Andriamananoro managed projects involving the reforestation of mangrove swamps and the development of blue economy with an international conference on sustainable blue economy.


== ICT Project Manager ==
In 1998, Andriamananoro gained experience in software engineering and information technologies while in France.  Afterwards, he engaged in numerous projects in the Caribbean and Indian Ocean. He was also the project director of Société M & Associés in Guadeloupe in 2002, as well as the General Manager of the Osmosis Business Solutions O.I. group in Antananarivo until 2008. Andriamananoro continued to serve as the General Director to the Malagasy Authority Office for the Study and Regulation of Telecommunications for Madagascar OMERT.
Andriamananoro was certified by the Galilee Institute of Management in Israël, in his capacity as ICT Senior Manager, he was also certified by EMPIM.


== Public figure ==
In November 2009, as Minister of Telecommunications, Post and New Technology, he enabled the trunk routes on fiber optic cable for the whole of East Africa, a project known as Project Lion. This linked East Africa to East Asia and Europe with submarine internet fiber-optic cables. Andriamananoro ensured third-party access by other telecommunications and infrastructure operators, and established licenses for 3G Internet service, which now cover the entire country of Madagascar.
He became the Chairman of the Board to the National Shareholding Company (SONAPAR) from 10 December 2010 to December 2014.
During this time he was the official General Manager of the Authority Office on Regulation of Madagascar Telecommunications, OMERT (roughly equivalent to Ofcom in the United Kingdom or the U.S. Federal Communications Commission). He relieved his post in May 2014.


== References ==