The Venom Mob is a colloquial title given to a group of actors from the Shaw Brothers Studio who attained international prominence for their lead roles in the 1978 film Five Deadly Venoms. Its members consisted of Lu Feng, Chiang Sheng, Philip Kwok, Sun Chien, Lo Mang, and Wai Pak. Although the main cast have never referred to themselves as the Venom Mob, they have continued to be referred to as such in English-speaking media while English DVD versions of their films often introduced them collectively as The Venoms.
Prior their entry into the Hong Kong film industry, many members had attended Peking opera schools in Taiwan before being recruited by director Chang Cheh. They were cast in Five Deadly Venoms by Chang and screenwriter Ni Kuang to bring in and cultivate the next generation of actors into the martial arts genre. The group was active between 1978 and 1981 and made several films together following the success of their first picture.
The group disbanded in 1981 with the split being attributed to reasons such as the declining popularity of martial arts films in Hong Kong and Taiwan, changing audience preferences, and Chang Cheh's shift to the Mainland Chinese market.


== Roster ==
The main five (though there are six, Chiang Sheng is actually the fifth member of the Venoms, not Wei Pai, who only appeared in four films with the others).


=== Supporting Actors ===
Wang Lung Wei – a villain in several early Venom films. Made his debut in Chang Cheh's Shaolin Martial Arts, filmed in Taiwan during 1974.
Wang Li – appeared in later Venom films replacing Wei Pai, usually as a villain. Wang Li was also recruited in Taiwan and appeared in bit parts in New Shaolin Boxers and Chinatown Kid before his official debut in Shaolin Rescuers
Sun Shu-Pei – usually a villain with minimal fighting skills whose only heroic role was as "Long Axe" in Kid with the Golden Arm.
Yang Hsiung – appeared throughout Chang Cheh's Venom cycle of films in various heroic and villainous roles.
Lau Shi Kwong – another actor usually cast as the cowardly type with minimal martial arts ability, best remembered as the snitch Wong Fa in Five Deadly Venoms and as "The Dangerous Kid" in Flag Of Iron.
Cheng Tien-Chi – another graduate of Peking opera, Cheng made his debut in The Brave Archer 3, followed by House Of Traps and Ode to Gallantry. He would later star in lead roles in Five Elements Ninjas, The Weird Man and The Nine Demons.
Chu Ko – also debuted in The Brave Archer 3 and continued into the 1980s replacing Sun Chien, usually as an insidious villain.
Lung Tien-Sheng – usually cast as misguided  anti-hero, such as 'The Spearman' in Flag of Iron and 'Golden Snake Xia Xueyi' in Sword Stained with Royal Blood
Wen Hsueh-Erh – Lead female in several later Venom films. Excels at playing spoiled brat roles or the love interest of one of the main heros.
Yu Tai Ping – The lead henchman in earlier Venom films, would later switch sides during 1981's Flag Of Iron (literally) as his appearances afterwards were usually of the second-tier heroic nature in the films.
Tony Tam Jan Dung – A henchman and usually partnered with Yu Tai Ping, Yang Hsuing or Lau Shi Kwong and serves as under Lu Feng's character. He was usually seen as a character in background before becoming a top henchman in Crippled Avengers.
Chin Siu-Ho – First appeared in small role in The Rebel Intruders prior to making his official credited debut in 2 Champions Of Shaolin. Proceeded to co-star in Ten Tigers of Kwangtung, Legend of the Fox and Masked Avengers among others, in addition to films for other directors at Shaw after Chang Cheh's cohorts disbanded.


== Venom films ==
Films directed by Chang Cheh (or a Venom) that feature at least three Venoms in starring roles.


== Venom-Related Films ==
Films directed by Chang Cheh that feature Venoms in supporting roles or fewer than three Venoms in starring roles.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== See also ==
Cinema of Hong Kong
Hong Kong action cinema
Shaw Brothers Studio