Hassan Shariati Niyasar Persian: حسن شریعتی نیاسر, is an Iranian Ayatollah. He was a member of the Assembly of Experts, and represented the people of Isfahan province for the fourth term. However, he failed gaining a seat on the Assembly for the fifth term. 


== Early life and education ==
Niyasar was born in Neyasar, a city in Isfahan province. His family were religious, as his father and paternal grandfather were scholars in the region. He is also a descendent of Ahmad Naraghi and Mirzai Qomi from his mother's side. As a child he attended the Gozar Baba Vali school in Kashan, and then left to Arak to begin his introductory classes in Islamic studies.
Upon completing his beginner level classes in Arak, Niyasar then left to Qom to attend the Qom Seminary to further his Islamic studies. He took advanced classes here, where he completed his Darse Kharij level (Advanced level Islamic studies). During his time in Qom, he attended classes from several prominent scholars. Such scholars, were the likes of Musa al-Sadr, Mohammad Sadouqi, Morteza Motahari, Lakani Rashti, Mirza Javad Tabrizi, Ali Meshkini, and Sheikh Abdol Javad Sadhi Jabal Amal. He took Fiqh classes from Ruhollah Khomeini, Mohammad Taghi Borujerdi, Morteza Haeri Yazdi, and Mirza Abulfazl Zahedi. He took Islamic philosophy and Quranic exegesis classes from Mohammad Hossein Tabatabai. He did travel to Mashhad to study there for a short time under Sheikh Hashem Qazvini, and also Najaf under Mohammad Hadi al-Milani.  


== Responsibilities ==
Some of his responsibilities: 

Inspection and supervision of judicial & law enforcement affairs.
Responsible for taking exams from the students and graduates of the seminary (higher level & Darse Kharij)
Head of a branch in the Supreme Court
Teaching higher levels in the holy seminary of Qom
Member of the Assembly of Experts for the fourth term, representing Isfahan Province


== Works ==
Some of his works: 

Commentary on the discussion of Ayatollah Hakim's prayer
Commentary on the Usul Fiqh by Ayatollah Allameh Isfahani
Commentary on Khomeini's lessons
Commentary on Musnad al-Shia, by Mullah Ahmad Naraqi
Commentary on a part of the Tahrir al-Wasila, by Khomeini.
A practical guide on the Hajj rituals


== See also ==
List of Ayatollahs
List of members in the Fourth Term of the Council of Experts
Shia clergy


== References ==