The College of Biological Sciences (CBS) is one of seven freshman-admitting colleges at the University of Minnesota. Established in 1965, the College of Biological Sciences is  located on both the Minneapolis and the St. Paul campuses. Faculty in the college conduct research on a wide range of topics that contribute to understanding of the environment, human health and basic biology. Dr. Saara J. DeWalt is the current dean of the college.  


== History ==
The College of Biological Sciences was established in 1964 and began to operate in 1965. Important dates include: 

1964 - The University of Minnesota Board of Regents approves the establishment of the college on July 10, 1964.
1965 - On September 1, CBS begins operations. Dr. Richard Caldecott is the founding dean.
1967 - CBS grants the first bachelor of science degrees to graduates in May.
1970 - The Board of Regents approves the first CBS constitution.
1973 - The Biological Sciences Center was constructed on the St. Paul campus.
1987 - Dr. Paul Magee is named dean of the college.
1993 - The Ecology Building was constructed on the St. Paul campus.
1995 - Dr. Robert Elde is named the dean of the college.
1997 - CBS begins admitting first-year students for the first time.
1998 - Elde leads a university-wide reorganization to consolidate and realign departments.
2003 - The college launches the Nature of Life program at Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories.
2014 - The college introduces the first-of-its-kind Department of Biology Teaching and Learning.
2015 - Dr. Valery Forbes is named dean of the college.
2023 - Dr. Saara DeWalt is named dean of the college.


== Structure ==
The college includes five departments, including:  

Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics (BMBB)*
Department of Biology Teaching and Learning (BTL)
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior (EEB)
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Development (GCD)*
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology (PMB)
* Joint with the University of Minnesota Medical School 
The college's Departments of Plant and Microbial Biology and Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, along with the CBS Conservatory & Botanical Collection and the BioTechnology Institute are located on the St. Paul campus. The Departments of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, Genetics, Cell Biology and Development, and Biology Teaching and Learning are based on the Minneapolis campus. Administrative offices for the College of Biological Sciences, including the CBS Dean's Office, are located in Snyder Hall on the St. Paul campus. CBS Student Services is located in the Molecular and Cellular Biology Building on the East Bank campus. CBS also operates two field stations—Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve and Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories—and the CBS Conservatory & Botanical Collection, for education programs, field research, and public outreach.


== Signature programs ==
Nature of Life - All incoming CBS freshman must attend before entering their first year at the university. This portion of Nature of Life prepares students for the upcoming year and gives them an idea of one of the research facilities provided by CBS and the university.  The program continues for the next four semesters, during which each enrolled student is expected to fully immerse themselves into CBS and university-wide events and communities.
Dean's Scholars - Dean's Scholars is a unique program designed to support CBS students in building their leadership skills and preparing to be active citizens and change makers in their chosen professions and communities after graduation. Students are invited to participate in the program based on demonstrated leadership potential and a commitment to service based on the University application materials.


== Field stations ==
Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories, established in 1909, is a field station located inside Itasca State Park in northwest Minnesota. The station includes facilities visiting students and researchers who conduct research, participate in field courses and hold workshops and orientations, including the college's Nature of Life program.
Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve, located in East Bethel, MN, just north of the Twin Cities is widely considered the place where modern ecosystem ecology was established with the work of Raymond Lindeman. It is home to some of the longest running ecological experiments in the world. 


== Facilities ==
The College of Biological Sciences has footprints on both the Minneapolis and St. Paul campuses as well as beyond campus at its field stations in Itasca State Park and East Bethel, MN. CBS facilities include:

Cargill Building for Microbial and Plant Genomics
Snyder Hall
Gortner Laboratories
Biological Sciences Center complex
Ecology Building
Molecular and Cellular Biology Building
Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories
Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve


== Faculty ==
CBS is home to field-shaping faculty widely recognized for their contributions to the sciences. Five current faculty are National Academy of Sciences members, including:

Ruth Shaw, Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 2021
Dan Voytas, Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, 2019
Marlene Zuk, Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 2019
Sarah Hobbie, Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 2014
G. David Tilman, Ecology, Evolution and Behavior, 2002
Some noteworthy accomplishments by distinguished faculty include:
In 1982, Margaret Davis became the first woman at the University of Minnesota elected to the National Academy of Sciences.
G. David Tilman, a professor in the Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behavior and former director of Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve, is among the most cited ecologist in the world. He gained prominence for his seminal discoveries regarding the role of biodiversity for ecosystems.


== Undergraduate majors and minors ==


=== Undergraduate majors ===
Biochemistry
Biology
Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior
Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development
Microbiology
Neuroscience (NSC)
Plant and Microbial Biology (PMB)
Cellular and Organismal Physiology (COP)


=== Undergraduate minors ===
Behavioral Biology
Biochemistry
Biology
Biotechnology
Cell Biology
Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience
Computational Biology
Genetics
Integrative Neuroscience
Plant Biology
Marine Biology
Microbiology
Pharmacology


== Graduate programs ==
Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics (BMBB)
Ecology, Evolution and Behavior (EEB)
Microbial Engineering (MiCE)
Molecular, Cellular, Developmental Biology, and Genetics (MCDB&G)
Plant and Microbial Biology (PMB)
Affiliated program

Genetic Counseling


== Research ==
Faculty and students in the college conduct research on a wide range of topics at every scale of biological organizations "from molecules to ecosystems." Between 208-2023, the college's average grant expenditures were $30.8 million a year. CBS researchers are supported by the National Science Foundation, the National Institute of Health, and other major funders. 
In 2023, the University was ranked #1 in the United States and in the top three globally for ecology by Shanghai Rankings of Academic Subjects and #6 in biochemistry by the Blue Ridge Research Rankings.


== Student involvement ==
Many CBS students are also involved in student organizations related to the biological sciences. Administrative sponsored student clubs include:

CBS Student Board
CBS Events Board
CBS Ambassadors
University of Minnesota students also have the opportunity to create their own student groups. Examples of these student groups include:

AED Pre-Medical Honor Society
AMSA Premed
Biochemistry Club
Biological Science Research Club
Biology Without Borders
Brain Club
Ecology, Evolution, and Behavior Club
Forensic Science Club
Future Leaders Aspiring in Science and Healthcare
Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development Club
Health and Biological Research News Club
Inter-Professional Pre-Health Students
Itasca Booster Club
Marine Biology Club
Microbiology Club
Microbiota in Health and Medicine Interest Group
Minnesota Medical Leaders
Minnesota Science and Business Association
Minority Association of Pre-Medical Students
MSTEM
Pharmacology Club
Pre-Dental Club
Pre-Genetic Counseling Club
Pre-Meds in Action
Pre-Occupational Therapy Group
Pre-Optometry Club
Pre-Pharmacy Club
Pre-Physical Therapy Club
Pre-Physician Assistant Organization
Pre-Veterinary Club
Student Society of Stem Cell Research Club
Synthetic Biology Society
Undergraduate Public Health Association
Undergraduate Surgery Interest Group


== See also ==
University of Minnesota
List of University of Minnesota people
University of Minnesota Medical Center


== References ==


== Footnotes ==
"UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA, U.S.;Researchers from University of Minnesota, U.S., report recent findings".17 March 2007
"A Smart Start For Bioscience", St. Paul Pioneer Press, 10 October 2004: B10
Breining Greg, Hoff Mary, Peterson Smith Terri, Rinard Peggy, "Star Search",  College of Biological Science BIO, Fall 2005, Vol 4 No.2
"The Wildest Classroom in Minnesota." Itasca Biological Station and Laboratories. 26 Mar. 2007. Regents of the University of Minnesota. 7 May 2007.<http://cbs.umn.edu/itasca/>
University of Minnesota, College of Biological Sciences
University Catalogs


== External links ==
University of Minnesota, College of Biological Sciences