Thibaw Min, also Thebaw (Burmese: သီပေါ‌မင်း, pronounced [θìbɔ́ mɪ́ɰ̃]; 1 January 1859 – 19 December 1916), was the last king of the Konbaung dynasty of Burma (Myanmar) and also the last Burmese monarch in the country's history. His reign ended when the Royal Burmese armed forces were defeated by the forces of the British Empire in the Third Anglo-Burmese War, on 29 November 1885, prior to its official annexation on 1 January 1886.


== Early life ==

Prince Thibaw was born Maung Yay Set (မောင်ရေစက်), the son of King Mindon and one of his consorts, Laungshe Mibaya. Thibaw's mother had been banished from the palace court by Mindon and spent her final years as a thilashin, a kind of female Burmese Buddhist renunciant. During the early years of his life, Thibaw studied Buddhist texts at a kyaung to win his father's favor. He passed the Pahtamabyan religious examinations and gained respect and recognition from his father and the chief queen. He was also educated at Aitchison College in Lahore (now in Pakistan).

One of Mindon's chief consorts, the Queen of the Middle Palace, Hsinbyumashin, helped to broker a marriage between her eldest daughter, Supayagyi and Thibaw, who were half-siblings by blood.


== Accession ==

In 1878, Thibaw succeeded his father in a bloody succession massacre. Hsinbyumashin, one of Mindon's queens, had grown dominant at the Mandalay court during Mindon's final days. Under the guise that Mindon wanted to bid his children (other princes and princesses) farewell, Hsinbyumashin had all royals of close age (who could potentially be heir to the throne) mercilessly slaughtered by edict, to ensure that Thibaw and her daughter Supayagyi would assume the throne. During the royal Aggamahesi coronation, Supayalat pushed in next to her sister to be anointed queen at the same time, breaking an ancient royal custom. This resulted in two queens being anointed in parallel, a situation that had never occurred before in the history of Burma.
At the time of his accession, Lower Burma, half of the kingdom's former territory, had been under British occupation for thirty years and it was no secret that the King intended to regain this territory. Relations had soured during the early 1880s when the King was perceived as having made moves to align his country with the French more closely. Relations deteriorated further in an incident later called "The Great Shoe Question", where visiting British dignitaries refused to remove their shoes before entering the royal palace and were subsequently banished.
At the time, the kingdom's treasury reserves had diminished, forcing the government to increase taxation on the peasants. In 1878, the national lottery was also introduced on a trial basis, which became popular but soon went awry, with many families losing their livelihoods. The lottery experiment was ended in 1880.
In October to November 1878, a meeting at Mandalay Palace's North Garden significantly expanded the size of the Hluttaw from four departments to 14:

Agriculture
Public works
Land warfare
Taxation
Religious knowledge
Royal estate management
Sassamedha (Personal taxes)
Criminal justice
Civil justice
Water-borne warfare
Foreign affairs
Partnerships
Town and village affairs
Mechanised industries
During King Thibaw's reign, a new administrative unit, the district (ခရိုင်, khayaing), based on the administrative units of British India, was created, in order to centralize administration from the court. Altogether, the kingdom was divided into 10 districts and administrated by district ministers (ခရိုင်ဝန်), who had authority over smaller administrative units, the villages and towns. Thibaw also rolled back the conversion of local administrators from myo-thugyi (မြို့သူကြီး) to myo-ok (မြို့အုတ်), which had been part of administrative reforms carried out by Mindon, based on the prevailing administrative system in Lower Burma.
A proclamation issued by the court of King Thibaw in 1885 which called on his countrymen to conquer Lower Burma was used by the British as pretext that he was a tyrant who reneged on his treaties and they decided to complete the conquest they had started in 1824. The invasion force which consisted of 11,000 men, a fleet of flat-bottomed boats and elephant batteries, was led by General Harry Prendergast.


== Abdication ==
Main article - Exile of Thibaw Min

British troops quickly reached the royal capital of Mandalay with little opposition. Within twenty-four hours, the troops had marched to the Mandalay Palace to demand the unconditional surrender of Thibaw and his kingdom within twenty-four hours. At the time, the king and queen had retired to a summer house in the palace gardens.

The following morning, King Thibaw was forced on a bullock cart, along with his family, and proceeded to a steamer on the Irrawaddy River, in the presence of a huge crowd of subjects.


== Life in exile ==

After abdicating the throne, Thibaw, his wife Supayalat and two infant daughters were coerced by British authority to move to Ratnagiri, British India, a port city off the Arabian Sea. During their first 24 years in India, Thibaw's family lived at Outram Hall, in Dharangaon, inland from Ratanagiri, but in 1906 the Government agreed to spend over 125,000 rupees (c. £9000) to construct a new official residence for them. The family then moved into a grand two-story brick building, colloquially "Thibaw's Palace," built of laterite and lava rock, set in 20 acres (8.1 ha) of gardens.
The Government of India initially gave Thibaw an annual allowance varying between 35,000 and 42,000 rupees. This was increased in 1906 to 100,000 rupees (c. £7000). Thibaw was reported to be reclusive and did not leave the property during his time in Ratanagiri, but he sponsored local festivals, particularly during Diwali. He died at age 57 on 15 December 1916 and was buried in a small walled plot adjacent to a Christian cemetery, along with one of his consorts, Hteiksu Phaya Galay.


== Return of royal family to Burma ==
The surviving exiled royal family was relocated to Burma in 1919, after the king's death. In exile, the king's first born daughter, Myat Phaya Gyi, had had a romance with a married Indian gatekeeper, Gopal Sawant, which resulted in a daughter, Tutu. Despite the royal family's opposition, the three returned to Ratnagiri and spent the rest of their lives there. Gyi and Tutu lived in poverty and survived by making paper flowers to sell on the markets, as Sawant took all of her pension from the British government; he did however buy them a house. Tutu also lived her life in poverty and had eleven children who knew little about their royal ancestry until 21st century interest in the royal family.
The second daughter, Myat Phaya Lat, became the pretender to the throne and married her father's private secretary, Khin Maung Lat, who was also his nephew. They did not have any children, but Lat adopted her Nepalese maidservant's son.
The third daughter, Myat Phaya, went on to marry twice. Her first marriage was to a Burmese prince, Hteik Tin Kodawgyi, with whom she had a daughter, Phaya Rita. After a divorce, she married secondly a Burmese lawyer, Mya U. Phaya Rita married her cousin, Taw Phaya, a younger son of Myat Phaya Galay.
The fourth daughter, Myat Phaya Galay (1887–1936), married a former Burmese monk, Ko Ko Naing, and had six children, the eldest of whom,  Taw Phaya Gyi (1922–1948), became pretender to the throne. His son Soe Win is the present pretender. Another son, Taw Phaya, married his cousin, Phaya Rita, daughter of Myat Phaya.
Both the third and fourth daughters were born in India but died in Burma and two of their children married each other, pretender to the throne Taw Phaya and princess Phaya Rita. They had seven children, thus securing the royal family line.


== Affair with Daing Khin Khin ==
King Thibaw had a secret love affair with the noblewoman Daing Khin Khin, in the absence of his queen, Supayalat, orchestrated by his close companion, Maung Maung Toke. To marry her, King Thibaw made a solemn promise to ensure her safety within the palace and grant her the royal title of the Queen of the Northern Palace. He swore that if he were to break this promise, he would forfeit his throne, potentially leading to the downfall of the dynasty. Unfortunately, the king never fulfilled his promise, and Daing Khin Khin was executed by Supayalat while she was pregnant.


== Renewed interest ==
In December 2012, the president of Burma Thein Sein paid homage at the tomb of the king in Ratnagiri and met the late monarch's descendants. He was the first head of Burmese government to visit the grave. He also visited the former royal palace at Ratnagiri.


== Family ==
Parents:
Mindon Min
Laungshe Mibaya
Consorts and children:
Supayalat
Myat Phaya Gyi
Myat Phaya Lat
Myat Phaya
Myat Phaya Galay
2 sons (unnamed)
Supayagyi
Supayalay (junior queen)


== References ==

The Baldwin Project: Growth of the British Empire by M. B. Synge at www.mainlesson.com
Political Topics And Discussion > Who Really Killed General Aung San? at www.bearpit.net


== Bibliography ==

Candier, Aurore (December 2011). "Conjuncture and Reform in the Late Konbaung Period". Journal of Burma Studies 15 (2).
Charney, Michael W. (2006). Powerful Learning: Buddhist Literati and the Throne in Burma's Last Dynasty, 1752–1885. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Desai, W. S.  Deposed King Thibaw of Burma in India 1885-1916 (1967
Hall, D.G.E. (1960). Burma (3rd ed.). Hutchinson University Library. ISBN 978-1406735031.
Htin Aung, Maung (1967). A History of Burma. New York and London: Cambridge University Press.
Maung Maung Tin, U (1905). Konbaung Set Yazawin (in Burmese). Vol. 1–3 (2004 ed.). Yangon: Department of Universities History Research, University of Yangon.
Myint-U, Thant (2006). The River of Lost Footsteps—Histories of Burma. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-16342-6.
Myint-U, Thant (2001). The Making of Modern Burma. Cambridge University Press. pp. 9780521799140.
Scott, J. George, ed. (1901). Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States. 1. Rangoon: Government of Burma.
Shah, Sudha. The King in Exile: The Fall of the Royal Family of Burma (2012)
Phayre, Lt. Gen. Sir Arthur P. (1883). History of Burma (1967 ed.). London: Susil Gupta.


== Links ==