Zaloora is a village located in the northern Baramulla district of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), India. It lies approximately 16 km from Sopore, 10 km from Handwara, and 30 km from Kupwara. Zaloora is situated in a valley within a valley, surrounded by mountains on three sides and bordered by the Lal Kul canal on the fourth side. The village is home to over 6,530 chollas (stoves), indicating its size and the number of households. Zaloora is the third largest village in the Zaingair region, following Dangerpora and Shiva. It shares its boundaries with Harwan to the east, Tujjar Sharief to the southeast, and Unisoo to the west and south.


== Demographics ==
It has 10 Mohallas One of which is situated in the Gujjar Pati region of Zaloora and is called Dera Ismaeel Khan Named after Muhammad Ismaeel Kaak, The Mohallas have approximately 12,000 inhabitants. The village had a sizable population of Hindus, but most left because of the militant uprising of the early 1990s. The name may be derived from "zaal" ("spider web"). The shape of the village resembles a cage which is surrounded by forests from three sides and the other side is open occupied by agricultural fields which is like a swamp, not drying up


== Facilities ==
Zaloora market consists of almost 120 shops selling daily consumables including groceries, vegetables and fruits, medicine, timber, and iron. 


== History ==
Zaloora's long history allegedly began when the lake that covered Kashmir drained, and settlers moved in. Archeological findings near the hem of the mountains that ring the village seem to confirm that Zaloora was home to fisherman.
During the peak of the Buddhist era in Kashmir, Zaloora is said to have been home to a Bodvihar, sanctifying it as a place of religion and learning. During Badshah's reign, holy man Haji Lolo Reshi Baba Sahib, along with disciples, settled in Zaloora. It is said that He went on Haj (pilgrimage) 12 times. 
Late Haji sheikh Muhammad Sulaiman(r.a) was an honour of Zaloora. He was a very respectful person. He is the only founder of jamiat e talaba.
Another great personality of zaloora was Haji Ghulam Qadir Shah,who died at the age of 108.He visited different places of Kashmir to spread Islam.He was also rukn e jammat of "jammat I islami" Jammu and Kashmir. 
During the reign of Budshah (king of Kashmir during the 14th century), Zaloora got its importance. He turned the direction of the river Pohru through Zaloora in order to serve water scarcity in Zaingair.
In recent times, around 1947, the Gujjar/Bakarwal community had purchased land in Zaloora's present-day Gujjar Pati region. The local residents protested and took the matter to court. They lost the case because the land had been legally and rightfully acquired by the Gujjar community.
Frustrated by the court's decision, the local residents decided to take matters into their own hands. They gathered approximately 300 to 400 men with the intention of forcefully taking the land. As they approached the almond fields of Gujjar Pati, they encountered a wall that had been set up by the Gujjar community. The local residents couldn't see over the wall.
The Gujjar men, who were skilled in Gatka, a traditional martial art, began to defend their land against the local residents. The women on the Gujjar side joined in, throwing stones which they gathered in the morning toward the battle. The local residents were getting defeated by the Gujjar men and women, so they retreated, acknowledging the land as belonging to the Gujjars . In recognition of their defeat and the Gujjars bravery, the Gujjar community was bestowed with the title of Khan


== Tribes ==
Local families (tribes) include:Peer,lone,wani, Mir, Bhat, War, Sheikh, Gianie and Gujjar/bakarwal.
The Lone tribe is based mainly in northern Kashmir, although they gradually diffused throughout the valley. Members live in Zaloora and Sopore. The Baht (meaning "priest" or "scribe" in Sanskrit) are found commonly in states in J&K and elsewhere in India. "Sheikh" (or "Sheik") is an Arabic honorific meaning "elder". The origin of Gujjar/bakarwal peoples in Zaloora is uncertain.It is being said that they came from Outside the valley for grazing their Herds.They are now well-settled in Zaloora and speak Gojri. This tribe is classified as "Schedule Tribes" (ST). Ismaeel kaak Was a famous person in the Gujjar/bakarwal tribe. He was about 137 years old (witness of the First World War). "Mir" is a title derived from the Arabic title (as "Emir"). It was given to great leaders during ancient times. Among Muslims, "Mir" became a synonym of 'sayyid'. The Mir family have a separate [mahalla] called "Mir Mahalla zaloora A".
Other mohallas are chaay mohallah,Baigh mohallah,khanday mohallah, muqdampora,pehlipora,herpora,manzpora,Dera Ismaeel Khanetc.


== Education ==
Zaloora is one of the most literate villages in Baramulla District. Several mohallas conducted programmes to boost literacy rates and were key to that achievement.
The village has one higher secondary(Govt Higher Secondary School Zaloora),two high schools, one government-run, the other privately owned i.e. Islamia Model school Zaloora(the 4th oldest FAT school in kashmir) etc., four middle schools, five primary schools and was the first higher-educational village in Baramulla.


== Wildlife ==
Zaloora is home to a diverse range of Fish, Birds and wild animals the most notable are the Snow leopard and Himalayan black bear  the Bears are known to go into peoples farms, and can commonly be seen in caves  on the western side of Zaloora's mountains


== Sports ==
Cricket is the main supporting activity besides volleyball, football, kho kho, kabadi, gilli danda. One more special game played by the children of Zalooora is Brazz.
Batbagh is the famous playground (200 kanals).


== Professions ==
The village is home to a range of professionals such as IT workers, engineers, lecturers, and professors. The fruit business and walnut business are also important in Zaloora.


== References ==