Macmillan Cancer Support is one of the largest British charities and provides specialist health care, information and financial support to people affected by cancer. It also looks at the social, emotional and practical impact cancer can have, and campaigns for better cancer care. Macmillan Cancer Support's goal is to reach and improve the lives of everyone affected by cancer in the UK.


== History ==
The charity was founded 1911 as the Society for the Prevention and Relief of Cancer, by Douglas Macmillan following the death of his father from the disease. In 1924, the name was changed to the National Society for Cancer Relief, which it retained until 1989 when it was changed to Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund, later changed again to Macmillan Cancer Relief. From 5 April 2006, Macmillan Cancer Relief became known as Macmillan Cancer Support, as this more accurately describes its role in supporting people who have cancer. It has adapted the principles of being a "source of support" and a "force for change".
As the National Society for Cancer Relief, the organization provided funding to support the work of the Breast Care and Mastectomy Association of Great Britain, which would later become Breast Cancer Care.
In 2023, Macmillan Cancer Support were listed as the top ranked charity in the United Kingdom in terms of which charities people would be likely to donate to tomorrow, according to YouGov’s UK Charity rankings 2023.
It is governed by a Board of Trustees and Executive Management Team.
The charity's head office is based in London. Macmillan Cancer Support merged with cancer information charity Cancerbackup in 2008.
Macmillan works in partnership with other cancer research organisations and is a partner of the National Cancer Research Institute. Macmillan is part of the Richmond Group of Charities, which is a coalition of 14 leading health and social care organisations in the voluntary sector.


== Cancer Support ==
Macmillan Cancer Support supports local information and support centres, cancer support groups, benefits advisers and cancer support specialists, and can help with practical, medical, financial and emotional support.
Macmillan provides information about cancer through its Information Standard website, free printed and recorded materials, telephone support line and over 170 local cancer information and support services nationwide.
In 2023, their services reached and supported an estimated 2.3 million people affected by cancer.


== Events ==
Macmillan hosts a series of annual fundraising events, which include running, golf, swimming, and cycling events. The most notable event is the World's Biggest Coffee Morning, which made £16.8 million in 2023, compared to £13.7 million in 2022. Macmillan also hosts other large fundraisers, including Brave the Shave, which raises over £4,000,000 each year, as well as their Mighty Hikes series, which raised £12.3 million in 2023, compared to £11.2 million in 2022.


== See also ==
Cancer in the United Kingdom


== References ==


== External links ==

Macmillan Cancer Support website
Macmillan nurse fact sheet
About Sober for October
Learn Zone – resources and e-learning programmes for professionals and people affected by cancer.