Shake, Rattle & Roll Extreme (stylized as Shake Rattle R&ll EXTREME, and also known as Shake, Rattle & Roll XVI or Shake, Rattle & Roll 16) is a 2023 Filipino horror anthology film produced by Regal Entertainment, and the sixteenth and final installment of the Shake, Rattle & Roll film series after a 9-year hiatus since the fifteenth film. It is directed by Jerrold Tarog, Joey de Guzman and Richard Somes. It stars an ensemble cast top-billed by Iza Calzado, Jane de Leon, and Jane Oineza. It is the second Shake, Rattle & Roll film that is not part of the Metro Manila Film Festival since the sixth film in 1997. Salas and Calzado returned to the franchise after 18 and 17 years of the former appeared in the seventh film and the latter appeared in the eighth film.
The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics.
This is also the last Shake, Rattle & Roll film to be produced by Lily Monteverde before her death on August 4, 2024, at the age of 85. It is also the last film appearance of actress Maita Sanchez-Ejercito, who died in a endometrial cancer in Quezon City, Diliman on November 3, 2024, at the age of 55.


== Plot ==


=== "Glitch" ===

Lyka lives with her single mother Ingrid, her older brother Patrick, her nanny Hasmine and dog Choppy. One day, after her tablet breaks down and frustrated at being accused by Hasmine and Patrick of several mishaps at their house and being ignored by her mother, she retreats to her room. While doing so, her phone suddenly plays a children's show hosted by a mascot named Gary the Goat, which uplifts Lyka and prompts her to chant an incantation to invite him into their home. Lyka suddenly receives a stuffed goat toy after the incantation, which she claims to Ingrid and Hasmine was given by a friend. Choppy is sent outside after repeatedly barking at the toy and is brutally killed by a malevolent spirit.
Lyka becomes immersed in watching Gary's show while strange things happen in the house such as the lights flickering, the spirit lurking around its residents and Patrick's phone suddenly springing to life and recording him making out with his girlfriend Margot. Ingrid gets into an argument with Patrick after she sees their photos, which mysteriously appear on Lyka's tablet, prompting Patrick to run off. Meanwhile Hasmine is horrified after seeing the spirit, in the form of a demonic goat-like figure, lurk around Lyka while she plays with her tablet. 
While Ingrid is away, Hasmine is attacked and brutally killed with a clothesline by the spirit, which reveals itself to be Gary, in front of Lyka, who hides in her room. As Ingrid and Patrick return to the house, they come across a dead Margot, who went to check on Patrick and was killed by Gary, and Lyka being terrorized by Gary. As they try to fend Gary off, the three realized that Gary is terrified by a staff from a blessed religious image, prompting Ingrid to ward Gary off using the staff to allow her child to escape. At the backyard, Ingrid duels with Gary but it's knocked down. As Gary proceeds to choke Patrick, Lyka climbs a statue of Saint Michael killing a demon and throws its sword into Ingrid, who plunge the blade into Gary, destroying him. Ingrid collapses from her injuries as Lyka and Patrick gather by her side.


=== "Mukbang" ===

A group of influencers composed of Vee, Adelle, Ashley and Chef Kino travel to a luxurious mansion to meet with fellow influencers Robin and Raye, who had invited them for a collaboration culminating in a mukbang. They are later joined by Vee's influencer boyfriend Lionel, whose relationship with Vee is on the rocks. While cooking as part of the collab, Chef Kino meets Mang Isko, an eccentric-looking man who supplies them with meat to make dishes with. Kino is unaware that the meat comes from the remains of Adelle's assistant Beyonce and Ashley's assistant Hannah, who were lured and killed by monsters who then take up their forms.
While partying that night, the influencers notice Beyonce and Hannah acting strangely with their references to the group having eaten their friends for dinner and them being century-old shape shifters who had taken their forms as part of their "transfiguration". As the party ends, Robin and Mang Isko, who are revealed to be shape-shifters also, arrange for their comrades to attack the influencers in their rooms. However, Adelle fends off an attack and alerts the group. Adelle and Ashley hide together while comically recording live on social media before Ashley dumps Adelle as bait to be devoured. Ashley is later cornered by Mang Isko, who gives her a piece of entrails and thanks her for calling her friends in before a transfigured Adelle and other monsters devour her. Vee and Lionel fight off the monsters while bickering over their relationship at the same time before Lionel decides to stay behind to buy Vee time to escape the mansion. Outside, Vee is relieved to see Lionel apparently safe before realizing that he had been transfigured. She is then cornered by Raye, who reveals herself to be one of the monsters, Robin and Mang Isko, who kills her and assumes her body to rejuvenate himself.
The next day, the monsters order Chef Kino, who they spare after taking a liking to his cooking, to cook his friends' remains on pain of death. The transfigured influencers then proceed with their mukbang, which becomes viral and prompts Robin and Raye to invite more unsuspecting victims for a collab.


=== "Rage" ===

Trina, her boyfriend Moze, and their friends Alfie, Bong and Shai stumble upon their friend Coy while passing through the latter's village on a road trip. The group accepts an invitation by Coy to spend the night at a nearby river to watch a meteor shower. While walking across the river, Bong stumbles upon fragments of a meteorite and is infected by a parasite that emerges from the rock when he touches it. As Shai comes to help him, Bong turns violent and stabs her before being killed by their other friends. After taking Bong and Shai to a hut, Moze and Alfie go out to seek help, but narrowly survive an attack by two people with the same violent behavior as Bong. Trina is attacked by a reanimated Bong and Shai, but is rescued by Coy, who then tells the group that his villagers have been turned into violent zombies bent on killing the uninfected after coming into contact with the parasites from the meteorites.
The group are sheltered by the village captain at her house, along with a pregnant woman named Faya. While trying to find a restroom, Trina stumbles across several corpses in the house and is captured by the captain, who had drugged her friends' drinking water. At gunpoint, the captain takes Trina to the basement, where she has kept her zombified son, hoping to keep him "alive" by killing the uninfected. Trina fights back and pushes the captain into her son, who kills her. Trina wakes up her friends and flees with Faya. On their way to a warehouse, their tricycle breaks down at a school, whose zombified residents become attracted to Moze's futile efforts to restart their vehicle. As they escape, Coy is intercepted and killed by the zombies. At the warehouse, Moze and Alfie are attacked by zombified workers while trying to find a truck, forcing Moze to kill Alfie in an act of mercy after he is infected. Trina attends to Faya as she goes into labor and gives birth, attracting more zombies in the process. As the trio and Moze reunite, the latter gives the truck’s keys to Trina. Moze distracts the zombies and runs off in an opposite direction to buy some time for Trina and Faya to escape. Trina, Faya and her baby manage to drive away, but on the road Faya dies of childbirth complications, leaving Trina to continue on with Faya's baby as she calls her mother to tell her she is coming home.
As Trina continues her journey, a reporter narrates that the meteor shower has caused a global pandemic and a zombie outbreak of what is dubbed the "rage-borne disease".


== Cast ==


=== "Glitch" ===
Iza Calzado as Ingrid Salvador
Miggs Cuaderno as Patrick Salvador
Donna Cariaga as Hasmine
Angel Guardian as Margot
Jewel Milag as Lyka Salvador
Kim Atienza as John Cornelius
Vaughn Ross Meneses Versoza as Gary The Goat / Creature


=== "Mukbang" ===
Jane Oineza as Vee
RK Bagatsing as Lionel
Paul Salas as Robin
AC Bonifacio as Ashley
Ninong Ry as Chef Kino
Elle Villanueva as Raye
Phi Palmos as Beyonce
Esnyr Ranollo as Adelle
Jana Taladro as Hannah
Francis Mata as Mang Isko
Ian Gimena as Isaac
Jhon Adrian Sual as Monster 1
Vajie Fernandez as Monster 2
JL Martin as Monster 3
Mark Anthony Caing as Monster 4


=== "Rage" ===
Jane de Leon as Trina
Rob Gomez as Alfie
Sarah Edwards as Faya
Paolo Gumabao as Moze
Bryce Eusebio as Coy
Dustin Yu as Bong
Mika Reins as Shai
Maita Ejercito† as Kapitana
Jerico Estregan as Kapitana's Son
Rosh Barman as Infected Farmer
Keahnna Reyes as Tourist


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
Shake, Rattle & Roll Extreme reportedly earned ₱3.3 million at the Philippine box-office on its opening day.


=== Critical response ===
The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Most reviews praised the second episode of the anthology, "Mukbang".
Joseph R. Atilano of the Philippine Daily Inquirer gave the film a perfect score of ten, calling it one of "the best ever made in the Philippines in the last 20 years. Atilano also praised the performances of Iza Calzado, Jane De Leon, Angel Guardian, Jane Oineza and RK Bagatsing, saying: "[They] did a fantastic job in their respective roles. They brought their “A-Game.” All of them have served their purpose in providing memorable onscreen characters for moviegoers." Writing for ClickTheCity, Wanggo Gallaga rated the film four out of five stars, describing the film as a "worthy continuation of the classic, legacy series..." and praised the performances of Iza Calzado, Jane de Leon, Donna Cariaga, RK Bagatsing, Esnyr Ranollo, AC Bonifacio, Phi Palmos, and Ninong Ry.
Lé Baltar of Rappler gave the film a mixed review. She described its second section "Mukbang" as a "stand-out" and "a moment of sturdiness in a shaky whole." Although Baltar described the other episodes as "artificial" ("Glitch") and "flat and stale" ("Rage"), she commended Donna Cariaga, Jane De Leon, and Bryce Eusebio's acting performances.
Likewise, Rafael Bautista of Nylon Manila called "Mukbang" the best section of the film, writing that it was a "crowd-pleaser" and "worth the price of admission alone." He praised Esnyr Ranollo and AC Bonifacio's "scene-stealing" performances and commended Ninong Ry as well. He described the film's first section, "Glitch," as "its weakest, though it is far from bad." He wrote, "Premise-wise, Glitch shines with how it touches upon the idea of “Lost Media” and creepypastas of dark web videos with sinister origins. [...] But it falters when it moves into more generic and predictable haunted house territory." Bautista praised Iza Calzado's "knockout performance." He described the final section, "Rage," as "beyond thrilling" and hailed Jane De Leon's performance as "the best part of the episode," though he also said that "Rage stumbles with how it quickly moves through interesting concepts[...] and ends on a predictable note."
Januar Junior Aguja of Freeman Cebu described the film as "decent." He gave the first episode, "Glitch," two stars out of five, writing that it "feel[s] unsatisfactory in its execution. Lost media as a horror concept holds much promise yet it’s suddenly abandoned as soon as Gary appears in Lyka’s imaginative mind." He gave "Mukbang" four and a half stars out of five, stating that "'Mukbang' will surely go down as one of the best 'SRR' episodes to date, all thanks to Tarog’s satire commentary on influencer culture." Aguja described the characters in "Mukbang" as "quite likable," noting that "they have their own time to shine, which is not easy to pull off with an ensemble cast in a 50-minute story." He also commended Ninong Ry's performance. Aguja gave "Rage," the final episode, three stars out of five. He described Jane De Leon as the "highlight" of the film, but criticized the flatness of the other characters.


=== Accolades ===


== See also ==
List of ghost films


== References ==


== External links ==
Shake, Rattle & Roll Extreme at IMDb