The East Zone Cultural Centre, abbreviated EZCC (ISO: Pūrvī Kṣētra Sāṁskr̥tika Kēṁdra), has its headquarters in Sector III, Salt Lake City, Kolkata, is situated in the Indian state of West Bengal, on account of Kolkata being referred to as the "Cultural Capital of India".  It is one of the seven zones established in India. The Indian states which are under the Eastern Cultural Zone are Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Assam, Tripura, Manipur, Sikkim, Andaman & Nicobar Islands. This zone is home to three classical dances, namely, Odissi, Sattriya and Manipuri dance; types of music include the classical Odissi music and semi-classical Rabindra Sangeet. In addition, Odia is one of the classical languages in India and the only living classical language from Eastern India.


== History ==
The EZCC was founded in 1985 and since, has been playing a significant role in promoting the numerous ethnic cultural centres and groups of excellence of the eastern parts of the India, with the objective of projection and dissemination of the traditional culture of Eastern India. 


== Composition ==
The EZCC is composed of the following members:

Director, Cultural Affairs Department, Government of Assam
Director, Arts, Culture & Youth Affairs Department, Government of Bihar
Director, Department of Art, Culture, Sports and Youth Affairs, Government of Jharkhand
Commissioner (Art & Culture), Government of Manipur
Director of Culture, Government of Odisha
OSD, Cultural Affairs & Heritage Department, Government of Sikkim
Secretary & Director, ICAT, Government of Tripura
Joint Secretary & Ex-Officio, Director of Culture, Government of West Bengal
Director, Department of Art and Culture, Andaman and Nicobar Islands Administration.


== Schemes ==
There are various schemes sponsored by The Ministry of Culture, Government of India gives grants to the Zonal Cultural Centers. These schemes are National Cultural Exchange Programme, Theatre rejuvenation scheme, North East Programme, Guru Shishya Parampara and young talent search.
To promote the culture in youth there are many competition organise by EZCC in following fields :

Folk Music
Folk Dance
Classical Music
Classical Dance
To preserve this Indian tradition, the EZCC organises various Guru Shishya Parampara schemes, which include:

Gotipua Dance (Odisha)
Purulia Chhau Dance (West Bengal)
Paika / Paika akhada a War Dancs from (Odisha)
Nauta (West Bengal)
Bordoishilka (Assam)
Thang-Ta Dance (Manipur)
Bhatiali Folk Songs (West Bengal)
Kushan Dance (Assam)
Pung cholom (Manipur)
Maruni (Sikkim)

West Bengal's capital Kolkata is the largest city of this region. The states of Odisha and West Bengal share a lot cultural and linguistic characteristics with Bangladesh and with the state of Assam. Together with Bangladesh, West Bengal forms the ethno-linguistic region of Bengal, which was also a unified administrative region until 1947.
Odissi is the oldest surviving classical dance, Pattachitra the most influential ancient classical painting, classical Odishian unique ancient architecture Kalinga architecture like Konark, Lingraja, lalitgiri etc.  Odia is the only modern Indo-Aryan language accorded the status of a Classical Language in India, and Odissi music is claimed to be the classical Music among Karnatik and Hindustani Music.


== Other Regional Cultural Centres of India ==
North Zone Cultural Centre, Patiala, Punjab
North Central Zone Cultural Centre, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh
West Zone Cultural Centre Udaipur, Rajasthan
North East Zone Cultural Centre, Chümoukedima, Nagaland
South Zone Cultural Centre
South Central Zone Cultural Centre, Nagpur, Maharashtra
The Cultural Zones of India are seven overlapping zones defined by the Ministry of Culture of the Government of India to promote and preserve the cultural heritage of various regions of India.


== References ==