The Big Four refers to the top four universities in the Philippines: the University of the Philippines System (UP), Ateneo de Manila University (Ateneo), De La Salle University (DLSU), and the University of Santo Tomas (UST), all located in Metro Manila — although UP is scattered across eight constituent universities, located in different parts of the Philippines.
The four universities are regarded as the most prestigious in the country, with admission being highly selective. Additionally, the four universities are the largest members of the University Athletic Association of the Philippines, have long-established school rivalries, and are perennial champions in the league.
Many influential figures in the Philippines, such as politicians, artists, engineers, and journalists, have studied at these universities. Graduates of the Big Four are seen as more employable, with many companies preferring or prioritizing graduates from the four universities.


== Overview ==
The Big Four universities are seen as the most prestigious in the country. All four universities rank in the QS World University Rankings, the QS Asia University Rankings, and the Times Higher Education World University Rankings.
Nationally, all four schools rank at the top of national lists, and their graduates frequently top board exams in the country. The four universities also have the greatest number of Centers of Excellence and Centers of Development awarded by the Commission on Higher Education.
All four universities, with the exception of the nonsectarian public UP, are private research universities affiliated with the Catholic Church, with UST also having the distinction of being pontifical.


== List ==


== Joint events ==
In 2024, the Ateneo Glee Club, the DLSU Chorale, the UP Singing Ambassadors, and the UST Singers performed together at the Saliw Lasalyano choral festival at the Teresa Yuchengco Auditorium of DLSU Manila. The four chorale groups performed compositions that included classic Original Pilipino Music (OPM) and gospel songs.


== See also ==
Battle of Katipunan, rivalry between Ateneo and UP
Ateneo–La Salle rivalry
La Salle–UST rivalry
UP–UST rivalry
Oxbridge, referring to the United Kingdom's oldest universities, Oxford and Cambridge
Golden triangle, informal grouping of universities in London and southeast England
Ivy League, formal grouping of elite older private universities in the United States
Big Three, informal term grouping Harvard, Yale, and Princeton
TU9, alliance of nine leading Technical universities in Germany
Group of Eight, a group of Australia's top research universities
National Institutes of Technology, 31 leading public engineering universities in India
SKY, informal term grouping the three most prestigious universities in South Korea
Imperial Universities, grouping of elite older universities in Japan
Double First-Class Construction, funding schemes for universities in China


== Notes ==


== References ==