Moulay Hassan (Arabic: مولاي الحسن بن محمد, romanized: Mawlāyy al-Ḥasan bin Muḥammad; born 8 May 2003) is Crown Prince of Morocco. He is the elder child of King Mohammed VI and Princess Salma. He has a younger sister, Princess Khadija. He is named after his grandfather Hassan II. In 2013, he began participating with his father at public official engagements.


== Early life and education ==
Moulay Hassan was born at the Rabat Royal Palace to King Mohammed VI and Princess Salma. He was named after his grandfather, the late King Hassan II. The oldest child of the current king, he has a sister, Princess Khadija.
Moulay Hassan pursued his primary, middle and high school education at the Royal College of Rabat. He is a polyglot who speaks several languages aside from his native Arabic, including English, French and Spanish.
Moulay Hassan has the rank of Colonel of the Royal Guard, Colonel of the Royal Army and Colonel of the Royal Air Force.
He obtained his high school diploma from the Royal College in 2020 and joined the Faculty of Governance and Economic and Social Sciences (FGSES) Al-Hakama in Sala Al Jadida, an affiliate of the Mohammed VI Polytechnic University in Ben Guerir (UM6P) for the 2020–2021 school year. He chose to major in international relations.


== Official duties ==

As crown prince, Moulay Hassan was the youngest participant at the One Planet Summit in France in 2017, where he gained international acclaim. In this respect, he is following in his father’s footsteps.
On 28 June 2019, Moulay Hassan represented his father, King Mohammed VI, at the operations launch ceremony of the new port Tanger Med II, cementing Tanger-Med as a leading port and vital asset to the Mediterranean. On 30 September of that year, Moulay Hassan attended in Paris the funeral of the late French President Jacques Chirac, which took place at the Saint-Sulpice Church. On the same day, he took part in the lunch organized by President Emmanuel Macron, at the Élysée Palace, in honor of the Heads of State present at the funeral of the deceased President Chirac.
On November 17, 2022, Moulay El Hassan inaugurated the International Exhibition and Museum of the Biography of the Prophet and Islamic Civilization at the Islamic World Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (ICESCO) in Rabat. On 20 December of the same year, along with his father, the King, and uncle, Prince Moulay Rachid, Moulay Hassan received the members of the national football team  in the Throne Room of the Royal Palace of Rabat, following their performance in the 2022 FIFA World Cup.


== Private life ==
In 2014, aged 10, his father gifted him a luxury car, which became his first car registered in his name. Concerning his hobbies, Moulay Hassan loves football and basketball. Young, he played football at the training center of the Royal Armed Forces (FAR) of Maamoura, in Rabat, with several children of soldiers. He also practices horse riding, his father Mohammed VI personally followed his training programs. In November 2016, in a report entitled "Private lesson" dedicated to their father-son duo, Paris Match magazine described Moulay El Hassan as "a son who listens to his father's advice". In 2018, in his capacity as crown prince, a Gulfstream G650 private jet newly acquired by the FAR was allocated to him. He loves basketball, and was eager to participate in his university club competition despite the Covid-19 pandemic.


== Foreign Honours ==
 France: Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour (29 October 2024).
 Tunisia: Grand Cordon of the Order of the Republic (31 May 2014).


== Ancestry ==


== See also ==
List of current heirs apparent
 Morocco portal


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Moulay Hassan at Wikimedia Commons