Los Angeles's 13th City Council district is one of the fifteen districts in the Los Angeles City Council. It is currently represented by Democrat Hugo Soto-Martinez since 2022, after beating previous councilmember Mitch O'Farrell that year.
The district was created in 1925 after a new city charter was passed, which replaced the former "at large" voting system for a nine-member council with a district system with a 15-member council.


== Geography ==
The district flanks the 101 freeway as it passes through part of Hollywood and north to Hollywood Boulevard in East Hollywood. The district's southern boundary includes the neighborhoods of Silver Lake, Echo Park, and Westlake; and north through Echo Park and western Elysian Park in the eastern Santa Monica Mountains; to Atwater Village, Elysian Valley, and a section of the Los Angeles River within its northeastern borders. It is geographically the smallest council district in Los Angeles and the most densely populated council district.
The district is completely within California's 30th congressional district and overlaps California's 26th and 24th State Senate districts as well as California's 51st and 52nd State Assembly districts.


=== Historical boundaries ===
The 13th district was mapped at its origin in 1925 in the eastern part of the city, but over the years it has been shifted west in keeping with the city's population changes. That year, it was in the eastern part of the city, covering Monterey Hills, Montecito Heights,  Elysian Park and part of Echo Park. It was described as the "North End, extending to Mt. Washington Drive, Avenue 44 and Marmion Way." The district headquarters was at 3014 Terry Place in Lincoln Heights. In 1940, the district extended westward to Vermont Avenue and south to Valley Boulevard.
In 1960, it took over most of Hollywood and extended from the Alhambra city limits to Fairfax Avenue. By 1964, Hollywood, Silver Lake, Echo Park and portions of Los Feliz and Lincoln Heights were a part of the district. In 1973, the district bordreed Eagle Rock on the east and reached into Hollywood on the west. In 1986, after several attempts at redrawing councilmanic districts in accordance with a U.S. court order to provide for increased Latino representation, the City Council in 1986 adopted a plan that stripped Chinatown, Echo Park and adjoining areas from the 13th District but kept Hollywood and Silver Lake and also cut north into Studio City. The result was a decided shift to the north and west, including part of Studio City within the San Fernando Valley and all of Coldwater Canyon. The eastern boundary was roughly the east edge of Elysian Park.


== List of members representing the district ==


== References ==
Access to most Los Angeles Times links requires the use of a library card.


== External links ==
Official  City Council District 13 website