Washington, a state in the Pacific Northwest region of the United States, has 132 public use airports that are used for general aviation, commercial flights, and other purposes. The state also has several military airports and private airfields. Public airports owned by municipal corporations, including public port districts, were authorized by the Washington State Legislature in 1941.
This list contains all public-use and military airports in the state, grouped by type and sorted by location. Some private-use and former airports may be included where notable, such as airports that were previously public-use, those with commercial enplanements recorded by the FAA or airports assigned an IATA airport code.


== Airports ==
This list contains the following information:

City served – The city generally associated with the airport, as per the airport's master record with the Federal Aviation Administration. This is not always the actual location since some airports are located in smaller towns outside of the city they serve. It is not meant to be a complete list of cities served, which can be found in or added to each airport's Wikipedia article.
FAA – The location identifier assigned by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). These are linked to each airport's page at the Washington State Department of Transportation.
IATA – The airport code assigned by the International Air Transport Association (IATA). Those that do not match the FAA code are shown in bold.
ICAO – The location indicator assigned by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
Airport name – The official airport name. Those shown in bold indicate the airport has scheduled passenger service on commercial airlines.
Role – One of four FAA airport categories, as per the 2017–2021 National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems (NPIAS) report released September 2016:
P-s: Commercial service – primary are publicly owned airports that receive scheduled passenger service and have more than 10,000 passenger boardings (enplanements) each year. Each primary airport is sub-classified by the FAA as one of the following four "hub" types (s):
L: Large hub that accounts for at least 1% of total U.S. passenger enplanements.
M: Medium hub that accounts for between 0.25% and 1% of total U.S. passenger enplanements.
S: Small hub that accounts for between 0.05% and 0.25% of total U.S. passenger enplanements.
N: Nonhub that accounts for less than 0.05% of total U.S. passenger enplanements, but more than 10,000 annual enplanements.
CS: Commercial service – nonprimary are publicly owned airports that receive scheduled passenger service and have at least 2,500 passenger boardings each year.
R: Reliever airports are designated by the FAA to relieve congestion at a large commercial service airport and to provide more general aviation access to the overall community.
GA: General aviation airports are the largest single group of airports in the U.S. airport system.
Enplanements – The number of enplanements (commercial passenger boardings) that occurred at the airport in calendar year 2019, as per FAA records released November 2021.


== See also ==
Essential Air Service
Washington World War II Army Airfields


== References ==


=== General ===
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA):

FAA Airport Data (Form 5010) from National Flight Data Center (NFDC), also available from AirportIQ 5010
National Plan of Integrated Airport Systems (2017–2021), released September 2016
Passenger Boarding (Enplanement) Data for CY 2016 (final), released October 2017
Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT):

All Washington State Airports (clickable map, each region has lists and links)
Seaplane Base Directory at the Wayback Machine (archived December 7, 2006)
Airport Directory (list)
Washington State Airport Reference Guide (list and links to PDFs)
WSDOT-Managed Airports (list and map)
Other sites used as a reference when compiling and updating this list:

Aviation Safety Network – used to check IATA airport codes
Great Circle Mapper: Airports in Washington – used to check IATA and ICAO airport codes
Abandoned & Little-Known Airfields: Washington State – used for information on former airports


=== Notes ===