In the Company of Angels II: The World Will Sing is the seventh major release from Caedmon's Call. It was released on March 7, 2006 through Essential Records.


== Background ==
In 2001 acoustic folk/pop group Caedmon's Call released In The Company of Angels: A Call to Worship. The album was celebrated as one of the best selling titles in the Caedmon's catalog, scanning 250,000 units to date. Caedmon's followed up with In the Company Of Angels 2: The World Will Sing featuring a blend of familiar praise and worship choruses, along with original songs written by the band. To this day the members of Caedmon’s Call have remained active in their home churches, this project takes that experience to a national platform. While In the Company of Angels: A Call to Worship focused on a local community of believers, In the Company of Angels 2: The World Will Sing illustrates the band's heart for sharing and ministering to the rest of the world.


== Track listing ==
"Great and Mighty" - 4:07 (Aaron Senseman, Cliff Young, Joshua Moore)
"Draw Me Nearer" - 4:18 (Fanny J. Crosby, Diane Sheets, Moore)
"Sing His Love" - 3:24 (Francis P. Jones, Andrew Osenga)
"Rest Upon Us" - 3:09 (Laura Story, Osenga)
"The Story" - 4:01 (Osenga)
"The Fountain" - 3:06 (Moore)
"Be Merciful to Me" - 3:33 (Randall Goodgame, Henry Baker)
"I Surrender All" - 3:54 (Judson W. Van DeVenter, Moore)
"We Give Thanks" - 3:31 (Osenga)
"Fellowship So Deep" - 4:22 (Senseman, Kinley Lange)
"Let Me Be" - 4:29 (Senseman)


== Personnel ==
Band members

Jeff Miller - bass
Todd Bragg - drums
Joshua Moore - piano, Hammond B-3
Cliff Young - guitar, vocals
Garett Buell - percussion
Danielle young - vocals
Andrew Osenga - guitar, vocals
Guest musicians

Matt Odmark - background vocals
Randall Goodgame - piano
Michelle Avery - background vocals
Alison Osenga - background vocals
Aaron Senseman - background vocals, electric guitar
Brandon Whiteside - background vocals
Technical credits

David Grant - engineer
Robert Beeson - executive producer
Bob Boyd - producer, engineer, mastering
Tim Parker - art direction
Ron Roark - graphic design, art direction
Jordyn Conner - executive producer
Taylor Lee - engineer
Andrew Osenga - engineer
Brandon Whiteside - engineer


== References ==


== External links ==
In The Company of Angels II