Palomino is the fifth studio album by Swedish country folk duo First Aid Kit. It is their first release since 2021's live album Who by Fire and their first studio project since Ruins in 2018. The album was released on 4 November 2022 via Columbia Records and was promoted by an extensive tour of the UK, Europe and North America. Deluxe edition with 5 additional tracks was released on 7 July 2023.


== Background ==
The album was announced on 22 June 2022 alongside the release of "Angel". Of the song, the band told NME "it feels special to release a song after such a long hiatus. Today we're so thrilled to finally share our new track 'Angel' – a hopeful tune for these crazy times about accepting other people even if you don't always see eye to eye. It's also about being kinder to yourself," they added. "We wanted it to feel really big, but vulnerable at the same time, something you can cry to and dance to as well."
A second single from the album, "Out of My Head", was released on 12 August 2022. Speaking about the song, First Aid Kit stated "we wrote this song last year together with songwriter and producer Björn Yttling. It was the first time we wrote for First Aid Kit with someone else and it was very inspiring. The song was written in the spur of the moment, almost like a stream of consciousness. It's about feeling stuck inside your own thoughts and desperately wanting to escape. We produced the song with Daniel Bengtson in Stockholm. It has a bit of a different sound from our previous songs. We wanted the production to feel like an old rock song from the 80s. We were inspired by Fleetwood Mac, Kate Bush and Tom Petty. This is one of our favourite songs we've ever written, we're so proud of it and are so excited to finally get to share it."
"Turning Onto You" was released as the third single on 30 September 2022, with the band explaining in a statement "when recording this we wanted to achieve that old school 'country soul' sound. It was truly a team effort with an amazing brass section by Goran Kajfês and Per Johansson, a laid-back groove by Moussa Fadera, and killer George Harrison-slide guitar by Daniel Bengtson. Hope you like this one."
The fourth and final single from the album, "A Feeling That Never Came", was released on 21 October 2022. In a tweet about the song, First Aid Kit noted "just like the title suggests, 'A Feeling That Never Came' is a song about emptiness. Those times in your life when you expect to feel joy or sorrow, but instead you just feel numb. This was the last song we recorded for the album – originally intended more as a b-side, it has quickly become one of our favourites. We feel like the softer, quieter vocals married so well with the Marc Bolan-inspired guitars and groove. It's a soft quiet banger."


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
First Aid Kit

Klara Söderberg – vocals, guitar, handclapping
Johanna Söderberg – vocals, handclapping
Additional musicians

Technical

Daniel Benston – production
Eric Boulanger – engineering
Tom Elmhirst – mixing, programming
Adam Hong – mixing
Niclas Lidström – engineering
Simon Nordberg – mixing
Chris Sorem – drum engineering
Artwork

Olof Grind – photography
Lisa Sander – artwork
Emy Storey – design


== Charts ==


== References ==