The legal age for marriage in Iran is 9-13 for girls and 15 for boys, unless there is court order for children 9 or younger with parents or guardian approve. However, in practice, many marriages involve adults with minors. Polygamy is allowed for men, with certain conditions - eg. legal registration - women, on the other hand, can only marry one man at a time. Divorce is legal and can be initiated by either party. The divorce rate in Iran is relatively high with rates being as many as one divorce in three marriages by 2023.
Marriage is encouraged in Iran, and there are social pressures to marry. The government provides financial incentives for marriage and childbirth such as loans, land and matchmaking services as well as taxes on unmarried invidiuals.
Historically consanguineous marriage has been popular.
Marriages with foreigners are legal but they must be registered, a foreign man married to an Iranian woman "will not be considered an Iranian legal citizen".
As of 2024 mean age for marriage had become 29.5 for men and 25 for women. According to The 82-page report, issued by Iran's parliamentary research branch, and compiled from interviews with 142,000 students, found 80 percent of females acknowledged having premarital sex.
As of 2024 the marriage loan is around 300 million toman ($5000 USD) for boy and girls under 25 and 23 years.


== Background ==
Temporary marriages have been popularized by Iranian regime.
The Iranian regime disapproves of casual dating or premarital sex.
Despite government program and policies marriage rates have been historically low.
20% of all women born in Iran in 1970-80s are not a in committed relationship. In 2024 the Iranian government started paying insurance incentives for egg freezing for females.
The wedding gifts or Mahr must be given to bride as she demands by the groom usually paid through gold currency and was tax free as of 2024.


== Process ==
Legal free genetic tests results are required in marriage contract documents.
There are state mandatory pre marriage counseling for couples they must partake.
Virginhood female hymen check are not required but are certified by state Legal Medicine organization.


== Cohabiting ==
According to Iranian regime the co-habitation ("white marriage") is strictly illegal and forbidden.


== Divorce ==
A husband can divorce his wife “whenever he wishes to do so” (Art. 1133) with a few exceptions through uttering in Arabic  : "زَوْجَتِی name of wife طالِقٌ".To null the marriage contract it must be done in front of two males.


== References ==