I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! returned for its twenty-fourth series on 17 November 2024 on ITV. The series was again filmed in Murwillumbah, New South Wales, with Ant & Dec returning to present the series. It was also confirmed that the show's spin-off would return, four years after being axed. It was given the new title I'm a Celebrity: Unpacked and was presented by Joel Dommett, alongside Sam Thompson and Kemi Rodgers.


== Production ==
Following the conclusion of the previous series, ITV confirmed that the show would return for a twenty-fourth series in November 2024. Prior to the beginning of the series, it was reported that the show would not feature any politicians on the series, following the controversy surrounding the casting of Matt Hancock and Nigel Farage in the previous two series respectively. Ant & Dec said they "think [the show should] do a year without politicians".
Prior to the beginning of the twenty-fourth series, it was announced that the programme's spin-off show, that regularly featured behind-the-scenes footage as well as interviews with contestants after they had been eliminated, would return after previously being axed in 2020. I'm a Celebrity: Unpacked was subsequently announced as the new companion show, with Joel Dommett, who hosted the previous spin-off I'm a Celebrity: Extra Camp until its axe, announced as the host, alongside Sam Thompson, who won the previous series of I'm a Celebrity, and Kemi Rodgers. The first trailer for the series premiered on 13 October 2024, and featured hosts Ant & Dec wearing lab coats and conducting experiments that resemble the bushtucker trials on various dummies at an "I'm a Celebrity..." test facility.


== Celebrities ==
The official line-up was announced by ITV on 11 November 2024. On 20 November 2024, Maura Higgins and Rev. Richard Coles were confirmed as this year's late arrivals.


== Results and elimination ==
  Indicates that the celebrity was immune from the vote
  Indicates that the celebrity received the most votes from the public
  Indicates that the celebrity received the fewest votes and was eliminated immediately (no bottom two)
  Indicates that the celebrity was named as being in the bottom two


=== Notes ===
^Note 1:  Oti was immune from the public vote on Day 19 and Day 20, as a result of winning the ticket to Celebrity Cyclone.
^Note 2:  The public voted for who they wanted to win, rather than save.


== Bushtucker trials ==
The contestants take part in daily trials to earn food. These trials aim to test both physical and mental abilities. The winner is usually determined by the number of stars collected during the trial, with each star representing a meal earned by the winning contestant for their fellow campmates.

  The public voted for who they wanted to face the trial
  The contestants decided who would face the trial
  The trial was compulsory and neither the public nor celebrities decided who took part


=== Notes ===
^Note 1:  Celebrities competed in pairs in a race to determine who would become the first leaders of camp. Danny, Dean, Jane, Oti and Tulisa had to drink a cocktail which decided the order they would parachute into camp to choose their partner. The pairs were chosen as follows; Danny & Barry, Tulisa & Alan, Jane & GK Barry, Dean & Coleen, and Oti & Melvin. Tulisa & Alan won the race and became the first leaders of the camp, making them exempt from the first bushtucker trial. They also had to choose who would face the first bushtucker trial of the series, ultimately picking Barry and Danny.
^Note 2:  Instead of competing to win meals for camp, Maura and Rev. Richard were instead playing to win portions of food for the Junk Food Buffet.
^Note 3:  Rev. Richard and Tulisa were excluded from this trial on medical grounds.
^Note 4:  Prior to taking part in the trial, Alan, Danny and Dean were told that they would be competing against each other and were appointed captains of the Blue, Orange and Pink teams respectively. Instead of collecting stars to win meals for camp, they would be instead competing to win money for their "cash cards", for which they had to use to pay for necessities within camp, and could also be used to spend on treats. The remaining campmates joined them at the trial and each chose a coloured cash card at random. Coleen and Jane were on the Pink team, Barry and Tulisa were on the Blue team, whilst GK Barry and Oti were on the Orange team. At the end of the trial, Alan won $1100 for the Blue team, whilst Danny and Dean both earned $500 each for their respective teams. Alan, Danny and Dean were later given the option to use their cash cards to purchase up to 12 stars at $100 each for meals for camp. Alan purchased four stars, whilst Danny and Dean purchased two stars each. Celebrities therefore received eight meals for camp.
^Note 5:  The campmates were told they would be competing in the Arcade of Agony in three separate trials to win a ticket to Celebrity Cyclone, therefore granting them immunity from the next two public votes. Half of the celebrities competed in the first trial, whilst the other half competed in the second trial. The celebrities had to compete to win tickets, with the two campmates from each trial who accumulated the most tickets advancing to the final trial. Each celebrity also had the opportunity to win a star representing a meal for camp. Coleen, Danny, GK Barry and Rev. Richard competed in the first trial, with Coleen and Danny advancing, as well as winning a meal for camp each. Alan, Barry, Maura and Oti competed in the second trial, with all of them except Maura winning a meal for camp. Maura and Oti claimed the most tickets and advanced to the final trial, which was won by the latter who ultimately received two days of immunity and the ticket to Celebrity Cyclone. Alan, Barry, GK Barry and Rev. Richard subsequently took part in a further trial to win meals for camp that evening.


== Star count ==
This table represents the number of stars each individual celebrity collected, rather than as a pair or group.


== Deals on Wheels challenges ==
As well as competing in the Bushtucker trials, celebrities have to complete in "Deals on Wheels" challenges in order to earn treats for the camp. Two or more celebrities are chosen to compete in each challenge. These are often mental challenges, rather than challenges including critters. They must complete the challenge they have been given in order to win 'Dingo Dollars'.
After completion of the challenge, the celebrities will take the Dingo Dollars and purchase a snack from Kiosk Kev, who is located in an ice cream van, "Kev's Wallaby Whips". Before they are allowed to take the prize, the other celebrities back at the living quarters must answer a trivia question. If they get the question right, they will earn the treat, but if they get it wrong, the celebrities will go back empty-handed.

  The celebrities got the question correct
  The celebrities got the question wrong
  No question was asked


== Camp Leaders ==


== Ratings ==
Official ratings are taken from BARB, utilising the four-screen dashboard which includes viewers who watched the programme on laptops, smartphones and tablets within 7 days of the original broadcast.


== References ==