Am I Being Unreasonable? is a British comedy-thriller television series produced by Boffola Pictures and Lookout Point and written by, and starring, Daisy May Cooper and Selin Hizli. The series was broadcast on BBC One in the United Kingdom from 26 September 2022. The series premiered in the United States on Hulu on 11 April 2023. A second series was commissioned by the BBC in October 2022.


== Synopsis ==
Cooper plays Nic, a mum stuck in a depressing marriage grieving a loss she can't share with anyone. Hizli plays Jen who arrives in Nic's life as a kindred spirit and school mum, but both are concealing secrets.


== Cast ==
Daisy May Cooper as Nic
Selin Hizli as Jen
Lenny Rush as Ollie
Jessica Hynes as Becca
Dustin Demri-Burns as Dan
Amanda Wilkin as Suzie
David Fynn as Alex
Juliet Cowan as Viv
Samuel Bottomley as Boy
Yohanna Ephrem as Girl
Ruben Catt as Harry
Karla Crome as Lucy
Marek Larwood as Kev
Noah Carr-Kingsnorth as Dennon


== Episodes ==


== Production ==
The show's title is borrowed from the Mumsnet message board of which Cooper told The Times “If you post anything on AIBU about whether you should end your marriage, they all scream ‘Leave the bastard,’ even if all he's done is sing over the Coronation Street theme tune." Cooper and Hizli knew each other from drama school. The show was partly improvised. Principal photography finished in  February 2022. The producer is Pippa Brown and the director is Jonny Campbell. The production companies are Boffola Pictures and Lookout Point. Executive producers are Jack Thorne, Shane Allen, Jonny Campbell, Daisy May Cooper, Kate Daughton, Selin Hizl.
Filming took place in 2021 at The Bottle Yard Studios in Bristol and on location in Gloucestershire.
A second series was commissioned by the BBC in October 2022. Filming on the second series took place in October 2024. Guest appearances in series two include Chelsea Peretti, Tom Davis, Denise Black, Jamali Maddix, Kojey Radical and Charlie Cooper.


== Broadcast ==
The show was first broadcast on BBC One on 23 September 2022, with all episodes being made available in the UK on the BBC iPlayer on the same day. BBC Studios have international distribution rights. The series was originally meant to begin a week earlier, but was delayed, as were many other scheduled programmes, because of the death of Queen Elizabeth II and the resulting period of mourning.
The series premiered in the United States on Hulu on 11 April 2023.


== Awards ==
On 9 January 2023 the show received a nomination at the Comedy.co.uk Awards 2022 in the Best Comedy Drama Series category. On 23 January 2023 Cooper received a nomination for Outstanding Comedy Actress at the National Comedy Awards 2023, while Rush received a breakthrough award.
On 29 March 2023 the series won three awards at the Royal Television Society Programme Awards. Lenny Rush won the Breakthrough Award, and Performance (Male) Award, and Daisy May Cooper won the Comedy Performance (Female). The show itself was nominated for the Comedy Drama Award at the same ceremony.
Cooper was nominated for best female performance in a comedy programme, Rush for best male performance in a comedy programme, and the programme for best scripted comedy at the British Academy Television Awards, announced on 22 March 2023.
Jamie Pearson and Helena Evans were nominated in the Best Editing - Entertainment and Comedy category at the 2023 Royal Television Society Craft & Design Awards.


== References ==


== External links ==
Am I Being Unreasonable? at BBC Online
Am I Being Unreasonable? at IMDb 
Am I Being Unreasonable? at British Comedy Guide