KFFX-TV (channel 11) is a television station licensed to Pendleton, Oregon, United States, serving the Tri-Cities, Washington area as an affiliate of Fox and Telemundo. It is the only major commercial station in the Tri-Cities area that is licensed to the Oregon side of the market. Owned by Imagicomm Communications, KFFX-TV has studios on Clearwater Avenue in Kennewick, Washington, and its transmitter is located in the Umatilla National Forest east of Pendleton.
KCYU-LD (channel 41) in Yakima, Washington, operates as a low-power semi-satellite of KFFX-TV. It simulcasts all Fox network and syndicated programming as provided by KFFX-TV, and the two stations share a website. However, KCYU-LD airs separate legal identifications and commercial inserts. KFFX-TV serves the eastern half of the Tri-Cities–Yakima market while KCYU-LD serves the western portion. On satellite, KFFX-TV is only available on DirecTV, while Dish Network carries KCYU-LD instead.


== History ==
Channel 11 signed on the air January 11, 1999, as KAUP; on April 5, the call letters were changed to KFFX-TV. It was the first full-powered VHF station in what had previously been a "UHF island." It was also the first station on the Tri-Cities side of the market not to be a satellite of a station in Yakima.
The station replaced KBWU-LP (channel 66), a low-power semi-satellite of KAYU-TV in Spokane (which was carried by cable providers throughout southeastern Washington and northeastern Oregon); KCYU-LP was also a semi-satellite of KAYU before the launch of KFFX. KBWU (which originally had the call sign K66BW, though it was referred to as "KBW" outside of station identifications) had been on the air since October 1, 1989; that station, now KBWU-LD (channel 36), is now a translator of KFFX.
Initially, the KFFX-TV license was owned by Communication Properties; Northwest Broadcasting, through its Mountain Broadcasting subsidiary, operated the station under a local marketing agreement. Northwest filed to acquire KFFX outright in November 1999; however, the sale, approved on September 27, 2000, was not completed until January 14, 2003 because Northwest was required to divest another full-power television station in the Tri-Cities market, KBKI (channel 9, later known as KCWK) in Walla Walla, in order to complete its purchase of KFFX. KBKI was ultimately acquired by Pappas Telecasting.
In February 2019, Reuters reported that Apollo Global Management had agreed to acquire the entirety of Brian Brady's television portfolio, which it intends to merge with Cox Media Group (which Apollo is acquiring at the same time) and stations spun off from Nexstar Media Group's purchase of Tribune Broadcasting, once the purchases are approved by the FCC. In March 2019 filings with the FCC, Apollo confirmed that its newly-formed broadcasting group, Terrier Media, would acquire Northwest Broadcasting, with Brian Brady holding an unspecified minority interest in Terrier. In June 2019, it was announced that Terrier Media would instead operate as Cox Media Group, as Apollo had reached a deal to also acquire Cox's radio and advertising businesses. The transaction was completed on December 17.
On March 29, 2022, Cox Media Group announced it would sell KFFX-TV, KCYU-LD and 16 other stations to Imagicomm Communications, an affiliate of the parent company of the INSP cable channel, for $488 million; the sale was completed on August 1.


== Newscasts ==
KFFX-TV airs a nightly newscast, Fox First at Ten. The newscast is produced weeknights by NBC affiliate KNDU (channel 25); on weekends, KFFX carries the 10 p.m. newscast from Spokane sister station KAYU-TV (produced by KNDU's sister KHQ-TV). KFFX also airs KAYU's KHQ-produced Good Day on weekday mornings.


== Technical information ==


=== Subchannels ===
The station's signal is multiplexed:

KFFX has been digital-only since February 17, 2009. As the station's transmitter site typically becomes inaccessible to standard vehicles due to eastern Oregon's typically harsh winters, Northwest Broadcasting provided station engineers with snowmobiles on February 16, 2009, to complete the final post-transition installations.
On April 21, 2009, the station added a digital subchannel which includes This TV, but was changed to Telemundo in 2016.


=== Translators ===
K26NF-D  Ellensburg, WA
K19BY-D  Grangeville, ID
K23FH-D  Milton-Freewater
K34MZ-D  Prosser, WA
KBWU-LD  Richland, WA
KCYU-LD  Yakima, WA


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website