Loris is the common name for the strepsirrhine mammals of the subfamily Lorinae (sometimes spelled Lorisinae) in the family Lorisidae. Loris is one genus in this subfamily and includes the slender lorises, Nycticebus is the genus containing the slow lorises, and Xanthonycticebus is the genus name of the pygmy slow loris.


== Description ==
Lorises are nocturnal and arboreal. They are found in tropical and woodland forests of India, Sri Lanka, and parts of southeast Asia. Their locomotion is a slow and cautious climbing form of quadrupedalism. Some lorises are almost entirely insectivorous, while others also include fruits, gums, leaves, and slugs in their diet.
Lorises, like most strepsirrhines, have a special adaptation called a "toothcomb" in their lower front teeth, which they use for grooming their fur and even injecting their venom.
Female lorises practice infant parking, leaving their infants behind in trees or bushes. Before they do this, they bathe their young with allergenic saliva that is acquired by licking patches on the insides of their elbows which produce a mild toxin that discourages most predators, though orangutans occasionally eat lorises.


== Taxonomic classification ==
The family Lorisidae is found within the infraorder Lemuriformes and superfamily Lorisoidea, along with the family Galagidae, the galagos. This superfamily is a sister taxon of Lemuroidea, the lemurs. Within Lorinae, there are ten species (and several more subspecies) of lorises across three genera:

Family Lorisidae
Subfamily Perodicticinae
Subfamily Lorinae
Genus Loris
Gray slender loris, Loris lydekkerianus
Highland slender loris, L. lydekkerianus grandis
Mysore slender loris, L. lydekkerianus lydekkerianus
Malabar slender loris, L. lydekkerianus malabaricus
Northern Ceylonese slender loris, L. lydekkerianus nordicus
Red slender loris, L. tardigradus
Dry Zone slender loris, L. tardigradus tardigradus
Horton Plains slender loris, L. tardigradus nyctoceboides
Genus Xanthonycticebus
Pygmy slow loris, X. pygmaeus
Genus Nycticebus
Bangka slow loris, Nycticebus bancanus
Bengal slow loris, N. bengalensis
Bornean slow loris, N. borneanus
Sunda slow loris, N. coucang
Javan slow loris, N. javanicus
Kayan River slow loris, N. kayan
Philippine slow loris, N. menagensis
Sumatran slow loris, N. hilleri
†? N. linglom (fossil, Miocene)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Data related to Loris at Wikispecies