Paduka Sri Sultan Sir Abdul Hamid Halim Shah ibni Almarhum Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Mukarram Shah  (Jawi: ڤدوك سري سلطان سر عبد الحميد حليم شاه ابن المرحوم سلطان أحمد تاج الدين مكرم شاه; 4 June 1864 – 13 May 1943) was the 26th Sultan of Kedah and reigned from 1881 to 1943.


== Foreign relations ==
During his reign, the Sultan had asked for a $2,500,000 loan from Siam during a state financial crisis in 1905. The loan was extended with the condition that a Financial Advisor from the court of Siam be accepted and a state council be created to assist the Sultan in the administration of all public affairs. This resulted in the promulgation of a new constitution on 29 July 1905. The state council was run by his brothers followed by their sons. The formation of the state council thus curbed the Sultan's administrative powers.
His reign marked the transition from Siamese suzerainty over Kedah to being a British Protectorate as an Unfederated Malay States following the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909.


== Personal life ==
He was the son of Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Mukarram Shah and Wan Hajar.
The Sultan had several wives and partners; Che Manjelara, Che Sofiah, Sharifah Fatimah Binti Syed Idrus, Sharifah Seha Binti Syed Hussein, Che Spachendra, Sharifah Mariam and Che Laraseh. The Sultan's seventh son and twentieth child with Makche Manjelara, Tunku Abdul Rahman, who would later become the first Prime Minister of Malaysia. The Sultan was succeeded by another son, Sultan Badlishah in 1943.


== Family ==
Children with Che Puan Spachendra (died 1907)
Tunku Ibrahim
Tunku Zam Zam
Tunku Rokiah
Tunku Fatimah
Tunku Kassim
Children with Che Laraseh binti Lebai Ishak (died 1946)
Tunku Mansor
Tunku Sofiah
Tunku Johara
Tunku Noor
Tunku Zaleha
Tunku Abdul Jalil
Tunku Mohamad Akil
Children with Sharifah Mariam binti Syed Mohamad Al-Idrus
Tunku Ahmad Tajuddin
Tunku Abdullah
Tunku Zainal Rashid Thani
Tunku Zainal Abidin
Children with Sharifah Seha binti Syed Hussein (died 1922)
Tunku Abdullah Thani
Tunku Pengeran
Tunku Balkis
Tunku Zahara
Children with Tunku Nai Sofiah binti Almarhum Tunku Nai Haji Hassan (died 1948)
Tunku Mohamad
Tunku Badlishah
Tunku Hindon
Children with Paduka Seri Che Menjalara @ Neang Nara Burirak Menjalara Luang Nara Burirak or Nueang Nandanagara (died 1941)
Tunku Yusof (CM of Kedah)
Tunku Aminah
Tunku Zabedah Manjalara
Tunku Abdul Rahman (CM of Malaya/PM Malaysia)
Tunku Baharum
Tunku Dakiah Manjalara
Tunku Habsah
Tunku Jaafar Shah
Tunku Jahara
Tunku Kalsom
Tunku Muhammad Jewa (Tunku Temenggung)
Tunku Mohamad Saad
Children with Sharifah Fatimah binti Syed Idrus (died 1931)
Tunku Ya'acob
Tunku Hajar
Tunku Yahaya
Tunku Abdul Majid
Tunku Zainal Abidin Thani
Tunku Shuib
Tunku Shah Faris


== Honours ==


=== Foreign honours ===
 Thailand
 Member of the Order of the Crown of Siam (1876)
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Siam (1890)
 Dushdi Mala Medal (Rajkarn Pandin) (1893)
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the White Elephant of Siam (1895)
 Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Chula Chom Klao of Siam (1895)
 Knight Grand Cordon of the Order of Chula Chom Klao of Siam (1908)
 United Kingdom
 Honorary Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) – Sir (1911)
 King George VI Coronation Medal (1937)


== References ==


== External links ==

List of Sultans of Kedah