Dance Tracks Vol.1 is Namie Amuro's debut studio album and only release through Toshiba-EMI. Nine days after Dance Tracks Vol.1 hit stores, she released her first single with Avex Trax, "Body Feels Exit" on 25 October 1995. The album reached the top position on the Oricon charts and charted for forty-four weeks.
The album is currently out of print, and is not listed in the official discography of Amuro along with her greatest hits album Original Tracks Vol. 1 (1996).


== Background and content ==
Released three months after the final Super Monkey's single, Dance Tracks Vol.1 could almost be classified as more of a remix album than an original album. Six out of the seven Super Monkey's singles appear on the album, all of which have been remixed. The album was originally scheduled to include four or five new songs, but because Amuro had a sore throat, the album was limited to three new songs: "Go! Go! (Yume no Hayasade)" (a cover of DJ NRG's "GO GO"), "Get My Shinin'," and "Super Luck!," and the rest were remixes of existing songs; Amuro later expressed regret, calling the album "a very half-baked album."
The other members of the "Super Monkey's" appear within the artwork of the album, but are not credited with any vocals. They are also not given credit for the album. All seven original Super Monkey's single were accredited to both Amuro and the group. Following the massive success of this album and her next release, Sweet 19 Blues (1996) through Avex Trax, Toshiba-EMI released a "best of" compilation containing all original Super Monkey's a-sides and b-sides entitled, Original Tracks Vol.1 (1996).


== Reception ==
Dance Tracks Vol.1 debuted at number one on the Oricon Albums Chart, with 468,240 copies sold in its first week. It dropped to number two the next week, selling 132,540 copies. The album stayed in the top ten for ten nonconsecutive weeks, and charted in the top 300 for 44 weeks. Dance Tracks Vol.1 became the 21st best-selling album of 1995, selling 877,960 copies. It also sold 987,490 copies in 1996, becoming the 22nd best-selling album of that year. In the history of Japanese Oricon albums chart, Dance Tracks Vol.1 ranked at the 88th best selling album of all time, with cumulative physical sales of over 1.8 million copies. In 1996, the album was certified double million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan (RIAJ).


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Namie Amuro - vocals, background vocals
Producers - Masato 'Max' Masato, Yukihito Sakakibara
Mixing - Naoki Yamada, Yoshinori Kaji, Koji Morimoto
Remixing - Yasuhiko Hoshino, Satoshi Hidaka
Photography - Takayuki Okada
Art Direction - Kumiko Izumiya


== Charts ==


== References ==