Woburn is a neighbourhood located in eastern Toronto, Ontario, Canada, in the former suburb of Scarborough. Woburn is bordered by Highway 401 to the north, Orton Park Road to the east, Lawrence Avenue to the south, and McCowan Road to the west.
Residences are split between high rises and single detached homes, which account for almost ninety per cent of all residences.


== History ==

A Wyandot burial mound, Taber Hill is situated in Woburn. Dating to 1250, the burial mound contains over 500 graves, with skeletons buried in a manner consistent with the Huron Feast of the Dead.
A post-office south of Painted Post Drive (formerly Danforth's Road) and Markham Road, and a schoolhouse on Ellesmere Road west of The Markham Road, today the site of Woburn Collegiate Institute, were important sites in the early community.
The intersection of Painted Post and Markham Road was also the site of the Woburn Hotel, and across the road was the Woburn Hall. The Woburn Hotel housed the meetings of the first Scarborough Council from 1850 until 1922.
Painted Post Drive connected Woburn to the southwest via Danforth Road and Danforth Avenue to Toronto, and to the east via Military Trail and Colonel Danforth Trails to Kingston Road and points east (for more details, see Danforth Avenue).


== Education ==
Two public school boards operate elementary schools in Woburn, the secular Toronto District School Board (TDSB), and the separate Toronto Catholic District School Board (TCDSB). TDSB and TCDSB elementary schools include:

In addition to elementary schools TDSB also operates two secondary school in Woburn, Cedarbrae Collegiate Institute, and Woburn Collegiate Institute. TDSB is the only school board to operate a public secondary school. The French-based public secular school board, Conseil scolaire Viamonde, and it separate counterpart, Conseil scolaire catholique MonAvenir also offer schooling to applicable residents of Woburn, although they do not operate a school in the neighbourhood.
Along with primary and secondary education institutions, Woburn is also home to the Progress Campus of Centennial College, a post-secondary college.


== Recreation ==

The south and south east sections of Woburn, along West Highland Creek, have a great amount of green space, echoed by the tree lined and winding roads typical of the neighbourhood. Woburn holds a number of undeveloped green space, making up portions of the Toronto ravine system. In addition, Woburn is home to several municipal parks, including Cedar Ridge Park, Curran Hall Ravine Park, Highland Creek Park, and Morningside Park. Municipal parks in Toronto are maintained by the Toronto Parks, Forestry and Recreation Division.
In addition to municipal parks, the division also manages local community centres situated in the neighbourhood, including Cedarbrae Community Centre, and Curran Hall Community Centre. The neighbourhood is also home to several shopping plazas and a mall, Cedarbrae Mall.


== Transportation ==
The neighbourhood is served by Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) bus system. These include the 54 Lawrence East and 954 Lawrence East Express (which predominantly serves the area), 102 Markham Road, 902 Markham Road Express, 9 Bellamy, and the 16 McCowan, (the latter four connect to Warden station). The area is also served by three bus routes on Ellesmere Road, which are 95 York Mills, 38 Highland Creek, and the 133 Neilson (the latter two serve the Scarborough Centre station). The area is also served by Highway 401 which runs through the Greater Toronto Area from east-to-west.


== References ==