The Sardinian wildcat (or, less commonly, the Sardinian lynx) is an isolated population of feral cats (Felis catus) on the island of Sardinia, introduced during the Roman Empire. It has historically been misidentified as a species of lynx or a subspecies of wildcat.
Under the name Felis lybica sarda, it is locally protected as a rare species.


== Taxonomic history ==
The population was first described as a wildcat as Felis libyca sarda by Fernand Lataste in 1885, based on the skin and skull of  a male cat from Sarrabus in Sardinia, which he wrote resembled an African wildcat but more reddish, grey, and brown, and with longer hairs on the back. Another name, Felis mediterranea, was also proposed for wildcats from Sardinia in 1896.
In 1910 it was reclassified as Felis ocreate sarda, while in 1912 it was considered a full species Felis sarda by Miller.
The Sardinian lynx with the scientific name Lynx lynx sardiniae was proposed by the Italian biologist Pasquale Mola in 1908 for two zoological specimens of a cat from Nuoro in Sardinia that were part of the zoological collection of the University of Sassari. These specimens were reassessed in 1911 by Alessandro Ghigi who identified them as Sardinian wildcats. Gighi's assessment was corroborated in 1981 by an Italian biologist who examined the still available mounted specimen initially described by Mola.
Following taxonomic changes around Felis lybica, an updated name is Felis lybica sarda. The term Felis silvestris lybica var. sarda, using an outdated name for the African wildcat, was also used in one paper.
Results of zooarchaeological research indicate that Sardinian wild cats descended from domestic cats that were introduced around the beginning of the first millennium during the Roman Empire, and probably originated in the Near East.


== Description ==
Mola described the body length of these specimens as 50 cm (20 in) with a 25 cm (9.8 in) long tail and a shoulder height of 35 cm (14 in). Their long and dense fur was fulvous on the back and whitish on the belly. He considered them to be a crossing of a lynx and a domestic cat.


== See also ==
Corsican wildcat
Cretan wildcat


== References ==