Oru Yamandan Premakadha (transl. A big love story) is a 2019 Indian Malayalam-language comedy spoof thriller film directed by B. C. Noufal and written by Bibin George and Vishnu Unnikrishnan. It stars Dulquer Salmaan, Soubin Shahir, Salim Kumar, and Vishnu Unnikrishnan in the lead roles. and Nikhila Vimal in female lead.The film's production began on 3 July 2017 and was completely shot in Kochi. It was released on 25 April 2019.


== Plot ==
Set in Kadamakkudy, the film revolves around Lallu, a privileged daily wage painter and his colorful gang of friends. Although he comes from an aristocratic family and is the son of Kombanaayil John, a respected criminal lawyer in the area, he prefers the company of his underprivileged friends Panchikuttan, Vicky Peedika, and Teny Sebastian. Lallu, although uneducated, has a lot of charm. He is adamant that he will marry for love and is looking to find a 'spark' in a girl. Hence, he has not found any girl to settle down with though Jesna is attracted to him and wishes that he marries her. However, Philip alias Paappi, his younger brother, a well-to-do computer engineer, wants to marry his girlfriend, whose parents insist that Lallu be married first. After trying and failing to find a girl that has the 'spark' he is looking for, Lallu sees a picture of a young woman, Diya, in the newspaper, who has gone missing, and suddenly feels the 'spark'. He and his friends try to find Diya, and learns about her kind nature in the process, yet cannot find her. However, one day Jesna meets Lallu and invites him to her wedding which was fixed by her parents. She clarifies that she is willing to wait until he gets that "spark" but her parents are unable to do so.
Lallu pieces together clues he gets from an accident which Diya met with and in the meantime learns that she is dead. He learns from SI Abhilash Karikkan that she was actually deliberately murdered by his nephew, Davis, an intoxicated gangster and criminal with psychological problems from childhood when someone mentions his mother and in anger he attacks them. Lallu takes his revenge by brutally hitting Davis and his friends, thereby avenging Diya's death. With the help of his father, he makes them stand before the legal system, ensuring Diya gets justice in the end. The film ends by showing that although Lallu believes he has never met Diya, he has on several occasions. When a small girl asks his full name, Lallu reveals that his name is Mohanlal John Kombanaayil and then she mentions that he looks like actor Mammootty.


== Cast ==


== Music ==
The music for Oru Yamandan Premakadha was composed by Nadirshah.


== Release ==
The film was released on 25 April 2019.


=== Reception ===
The film received mixed to positive reviews and was a commercial success at the box office.
Deepa Soman of The Times of India rated the movie 3 out of 5 stating: "The premise in itself might not be new, but the makers have managed to keep it quite entertaining." Deepa also praised Dulquer Salmaan's performance and wrote that it "is an out-and-out DQ show." Sify rated it 3 out of 5 stars and gave the verdict: "A suave Dulquer Salmaan saves the film." The reviewer concluded that "Oru Yamandan Premakadha is one of those films which is meant to be enjoyed without thinking too much." Cris of The News Minute gave the film a 2 out of 5 rating and wrote: "Dulquer's mass entertainer has a poor storyline." Navamy Sudhish of The Hindu said that it was "a bland treat with feel-good factors." Anna M. M. Vetticad of Firstpost rated the movie 1.5 out of 5 and concluded: "DQ looks good in lungis and is charming of course, but even his charm cannot hold up nearly three hours of exhausting wanderings." Manoj Kumar R. of The Indian Express rated it 1.5 out of 5 stars and said that "Dulquer Salmaan cannot charm his way out of this mess."


== References ==


== External links ==
Oru Yamandan Premakadha at IMDb