The rank of lieutenant general (or three-star general) is the second-highest rank in the United States Marine Corps, and the first to have a specified number of appointments set by statute. It ranks above major general (two-star general) and below general (four-star general).
There have been 77 lieutenant generals in the U.S. Marine Corps since 1 January 2010, eight of whom were promoted to four-star general. All 77 achieved that rank while on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps. Lieutenant generals entered the Marine Corps via several paths: 39 were commissioned via Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC) at a civilian university, 18 via the United States Naval Academy (USNA), 12 via Officer Candidates School (OCS), and eight via NROTC at a senior military college.


== List of generals ==
Entries in the following list of lieutenant generals are indexed by the numerical order in which each officer was promoted to that rank while on active duty, or by an asterisk (*) if the officer did not serve in that rank while on active duty. Each entry lists the general's name, date of rank, active-duty positions held while serving at three-star rank, number of years of active-duty service at three-star rank (Yrs), year commissioned and source of commission, number of years in commission when promoted to three-star rank (YC), and other biographical notes.


== Timeline ==


=== 2010–present ===


== Background ==


=== Modern use of the rank ===

Three-star billets in the United States Marine Corps include commanders of high-level Marine Corps commands, such as the marine expeditionary forces and Marine service component commands. Senior staff officers under the Headquarters Marine Corps (HQMC) directly reporting to the commandant and/or the assistant commandant may also hold the rank of lieutenant general.

About 30 to 50 joint service three-star billets exist at any given time that can be occupied by a Marine Corps lieutenant general, among the most prestigious being the director of the Joint Staff (DJS), principal staff advisor to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and historically considered a stepping stone to four-star rank.  All deputy commanders of the unified combatant commands are of three-star rank, as are directors of Defense Agencies not headed by a civilian such as the director of the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIRDIA). Internationally-based three-star positions include the United States military representative to the NATO Military Committee (USMILREP) and the security coordinator for Israel and the Palestinian National Authority. All nominees for three-star rank must be confirmed via majority by the Senate before the appointee can take office and thus assume the rank.


==== Statutory limits, elevations and reductions ====

The U.S. Code states that no more than 17 officers in the U.S. Marine Corps may hold the rank of lieutenant general on the active duty list, aside from those on joint duty assignments. Three-star positions can be elevated to four-star status or reduced to two-star status where deemed necessary, either to highlight their increasing importance to the defense apparatus (or lack thereof) or to achieve parity with equivalent commands in other services or regions.
Few three-star positions are set by statute, leading to their increased volatility as they do not require congressional approval to be downgraded. It is common practice in the Marine Corps to dual-hat operational commands under a single commander to remain under the statutory limit for three-star positions, and shifting them around if necessary to facilitate efficient command and control of Marine units.

In 2012, the commanding general of I Marine Expeditionary Force ceased to be dual-hatted as commander of U.S. Marine Forces Central Command (USMARCENT) to ensure that a single service component commander reported to the commander of CENTCOM, as CG, I MEF already reported to the Commander, U.S. Indo-Pacific Command. Lieutenant General Thomas D. Waldhauser thereafter relinquished command of USMARCENT to Lieutenant General Robert B. Neller and I MEF to Lieutenant General John A. Toolan in September 2012.
In 2020, U.S. Marine Corps Training and Education Command (TECOM) was raised from a two-star to three-star command reporting directly to the commandant of the Marine Corps after separating from Marine Corps Combat Development Command of which it was previously subordinate to. Lieutenant General Lewis A. Craparotta assumed command from Major General William F. Mullen III in August 2020.
The commander of Marine Forces Reserve (MARFORRES) was dual-hatted as the commander of Marine Forces North (MARFORNORTH) since the 2000s. With the retirement of Lieutenant General Rex C. McMillian in 2018 and subsequent transfer of MARFORNORTH to U.S. Marine Corps Forces Command (MARFORCOM), MARFORRES became a two-star command. In September 2019, Lieutenant General David Bellon assumed command of MARFORRES from Colonel Michael E. McWilliams, restoring the command's three-star status and with a command realignment in early 2021 assumed command of U.S. Marine Corps Forces South (MARFORSOUTH).


==== Senate confirmations ====
Military nominations are considered by the Senate Armed Services Committee. While it is rare for three-star or four-star nominations to face even token opposition in the Senate, nominations that do face opposition due to controversy surrounding the nominee in question are typically withdrawn. Nominations that are not withdrawn are allowed to expire without action at the end of the legislative session.

For example, the Senate declined to schedule a vote for Major General Charles M. Gurganus to be promoted to lieutenant general in 2013 and assigned as director of the Marine Corps staff, due to concerns of negligence leading to the September 2012 Camp Bastion raid.
In 2014, Major General Michael R. Regner, selected for assignment as deputy commandant for manpower and reserve affairs, had his nomination for promotion to lieutenant general returned to the president partially due to concerns of misuse of authority, including having subordinates perform menial tasks at his behest. Regner subsequently retired in February 2016.
Additionally, events that take place after Senate confirmation may still delay or even prevent the nominee from assuming office.

For example, Major General John G. Rossi, who had been confirmed for promotion to lieutenant general and assignment as the commanding general of the U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command in April 2016 committed suicide two days before his scheduled promotion and assumption of command. As a result, the then incumbent commander of USASMDC, Lieutenant General David L. Mann, remained in command beyond statutory term limits until another nominee, Major General James H. Dickinson was confirmed by the Senate.


== Legislative history ==
The following list of Congressional legislation includes all acts of Congress pertaining to appointments to the grade of lieutenant general in the United States Marine Corps since 2010.
Each entry lists an act of Congress, its citation in the United States Statutes at Large or Public Law number, and a summary of the act's relevance, with officers affected by the act bracketed where applicable. Positions listed without reference to rank are assumed to be eligible for officers of three-star grade or higher.


== See also ==
Lieutenant general (United States)
General officers in the United States
List of active duty United States four-star officers
List of active duty United States three-star officers
List of United States Marine Corps four-star generals
List of United States Marine Corps lieutenant generals on active duty before 1960
List of United States Marine Corps lieutenant generals from 2000 to 2009
List of United States military leaders by rank
Staff (military)


== References ==


=== Notes ===


== External links ==
"Releases - United States Department of Defense". U.S. Department of Defense.