Ardhangi (transl. Other half) is a 1955 Indian Telugu-language drama film, produced and directed by P. Pullayya under the Ragini Pictures banner. It stars Akkineni Nageswara Rao, Santha Kumari, Savitri. Music is composed by Master Venu and B. Narasimha Rao. Acharya Aatreya scripted the film based on Maddipatla Suri's Telugu translation of the Bengali novel Swayamsidda written by Manilal Banerjee. The film was successful at the box office. It has received the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu and the Filmfare Award for Best Film - Telugu. The film was remade in Tamil as Pennin Perumai and in Hindi as Bahurani (1963).


== Plot ==
Zamindar Bhujanga Rao has two sons: Raghavendra / Raghu & Nagendra / Naagu. Raghu is the mentally challenged son of Zamindar from his first wife. After the death of his wife, Zamidar remarries vainglory Rajeswari and Nagendra is their son. Due to the mollycoddling of his mother, Naagu turns into a narcissist, and he mercilessly flogs his sibling. Once Naagu visits their village, he tyrannizes the peasants, when intrepid Padmavati / Padma impedes his slave-driving attitude. Listening to this, Zamindar walks to Padma, declares her the right choice for Naagu's amendment, and fixes the alliance. However, Rajeswari & Naagu vetoed it. Thus, to uphold his prestige, Zamindar gets Padma married with Raghu. At the last moment, the truth comes out about Raghu's condition but Padma accepts him, as a woman of virtue. From there, she becomes aware of Rajeswari & Naagu's savagery to Raghu and shows defiance. Parallelly, it is made known that the old maid in the household who acted as a foster mother to Raghu by raising him, unknowingly gave him opium in his childhood leading to his mental condition. Doctor says he can be cured but Nagu sways him with money to not treat Raghu. Following this, Padma, with austerity and tenacity, molds her husband into a civilized person. 
Zamindar is amazed after seeing this change and entrusts Raghu with the family tasks, which begrudge Naagu. So, he menaces his father for his share, which Rajeswari also bolsters. Tragically, Zamindar dies in that mishap by falling down a flight of stairs. Before leaving his breath, he consigns totality to Raghu. Hereupon, Rajeswari is pissed off and about to quit. Thus, Raghu surrenders all assets to her and shifts to their village with Padma. After that, Naagu burns cash for his vices and puppets his mother. Plus, he fits his paramour Neelaveni & her family at home, which Rajeswari goes against. Naagu seizes her authority, and she receives a slap from him. Naagu also pesters the farmers for the lease arrears, and they bestow it to Raghu, avowing him as proprietor. Being conscious of it, outraged Naagu heads to the village to shoot his brother. Parallelly, Raghu reaches Rajeswari and hands over the amount to her. At this, she realizes her mistake, pleads pardon, and accompanies him. On the other hand, Naagu starts raging on the farmers when Raghu arrives and drops the money before him. Forthwith, enraged Rajeswari is about to hit Naagu, which Padma hinders. At last, remorseful, Naagu reforms seeing the integrity of Raghu & Padma. Finally, the movie ends on a happy note with the family's reunion.


== Cast ==
Akkineni Nageswara Rao as Raghunatha Rao / Raghu
Savitri as Padmavati
Santha Kumari as Rajeswari Devi
Gummadi as Zamindar Bhujangarao
Jaggayya as Nagendra Rao / Nagu
Surabhi Balasaraswathi as Neelaveni
Chadalavada as Bheemudu
Nagabhushanam as Veeraiah
Dr. Sivaramakrishnaiah as Appula Sivakamaiah
Dr. Kamaraju as Diwanji Kakkaiah
Doraiswamy as Bhushaiah
B. Narasimha Rao as Musalaiah


== Production ==
P. Pullayya originally wanted N. T. Rama Rao to play the mentally disabled Raghu and Akkineni Nageswara Rao as Raghu's half-brother Nagu. Nageswara Rao felt the negative role would not suit him, and was later cast as Raghu, which he preferred as he considered it "more challenging". The role of Nagu ultimately went to Jaggayya. Pullayya cast Gummadi as the zamindar Bhujangarao at the suggestion of film producer T. V. S. Sastri.


== Soundtrack ==
Music composed by Master Venu & B. Narasimha Rao. Lyrics were written by Acharya Aatreya.


== Box office ==
The film ran for more than 100 days in 5 centers in Andhra Pradesh.


== Awards ==
1955 - National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Telugu - Certificate of Merit


== References ==


== External links ==
Ardhangi at IMDb