Bringin' It All Back Home is an album by the American musician Johnny Copeland. It was released in 1985. Copeland supported the album with a North American tour.


== Production ==
Copeland recorded the album in March 1984 in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, where he collaborated with African musicians. It was produced by his manager, Dan Doyle. Bringin' It All Back Home is considered the first time an American blues musician recorded an album in Africa. Copeland decided to record there after his 1982 tour of the continent; many of the album's songs were inspired by the trek. Copeland included African percussion and the kora on many of the tracks.


== Critical reception ==

Robert Christgau wrote that the band "finds a groove somewhere between an airborne Congolese rumba and a Gulf Coast shuffle with some tricky dance figures thrown in." The Chicago Tribune noted that "African rhythms and instruments wind their way in and out of Copeland's more familiar Texas blues, sometimes seeming exotic, other times seeming perfectly normal." The New York Times stated that Copeland "sings with a strong, persuasive urgency," and concluded that he "comfortably extended his reach by working with an African rhythm section."
The Globe and Mail determined that "the singer-guitarist's music at its best moves, and the accompanying horn and rhythm sections here prove a cumbersome weight on the motion." The Toronto Star deemed the album "compelling listening, an almost off-handed synthesis of African roots music and raw, elemental blues."


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Musicians

Johnny Copeland – guitar, vocals
Michael Merritt – bass
Jimmy Wormworth – drums
Jimmy Hyacinthe, Joel Perry, and Malina – guitars
Halial, Jean-Claude Kungnon, and Souliman Moamed – percussion
Koffi Assalé – alto saxophone
Bert McGowan – tenor saxophone
Emmet King – trombone
Ben Bierman – trumpet
Ken Vangel – piano
Djeli Mousa – kora (tracks 4 and 5)
Technical

Dan Doyle – producer, liner notes
Émile Valognes and Pamphile de Souza – recording engineers
Dominique Samarcq – mixing engineer
George Peckham – mastering engineer
Ken Vangel – arrangement
Steve Billington – design
Albert Loudes – photography
Souleymane Coulibaly – technical assistance


== References ==