Chakr Innovation is a cleantech startup based in India specializing in material science technology. The company was founded by graduates from IIT Delhi and works in the fields of air and environmental protection. Chakr Innovation is the first company in India to receive type approval certification for their retrofit emission control device (RECD) from labs approved by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB). They have over 15 patents filed, and their work has been recognized across the globe by reputed organizations like the United Nations, WWF, Forbes, and the like.


== History ==
Chakr Innovation was founded in 2016 by Kushagra Srivastava, Arpit Dhupar and Bharti Singhla - graduates from IIT Delhi, to reduce pollution with the help of innovation and technology. The idea began with a group of friends having sugarcane juice at a shop with a wall turned black because of soot particles coming out of the diesel generator exhaust used for crushing sugarcane.
Chakr Innovation launched Chakr Shield in 2017, one year after its incorporation. The device could reduce the particulate matter 2.5 (PM 2.5) emission from a diesel generator by up to 90%. In 2022, the company introduced a dual fuel kit that would allow a diesel generator to run on fossil fuel and natural gas simultaneously in a 30 to 70 ratio.


== Products ==
Chakr Shield is a patented Retrofit Emission Control Device (RECD) by Chakr Innovation. It was also the first in India to get a Type Approval Certification from CPCB-certified labs like ICAT and ARAI for its capability to reduce the pollution from diesel generators by up to 90%.
The Chakr Dual Fuel Kit uses technology to allow a diesel generator set to operate on a mixture of gas and diesel as a fuel, with 70% natural gas and 30% fossil fuel. This can be a perfect conversion kit for industries with access to gas pipeline networks. With the launch of this product, Chakr Innovation reportedly became the only turnkey solution provider in India to control the emissions from diesel generators.
In 2020, Chakr Innovation launched a decontamination cabinet for N95 masks with the help of ozone gas. Ozone is a strong oxidizing agent that destroys viruses and bacteria by diffusing through their protein coats. Chakr DeCoV reportedly inactivated SARS-CoV-2 and reduced the bacterial load by 99.9999%, allowing N95 masks to be reused up to 10 times.


== Awards ==
2016: Winner of Urban Labs Innovation Challenge – University of Chicago
2017: Climate solver award – World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)
2017: Echoing Green Fellowship
2017: Champions of Change – NITI Aayog
2017: Recipient of "Start-up in Oil & Gas Sector" award – Federation of Indian Petroleum Industry(FIPI)
2018: Winner of Young Champions of the Earth – United Nations Environment Programme (Asia Pacific)
2018: 30 Under 30 Social Entrepreneurs – Forbes
2019: Winner of Maharashtra Startup Week Award – Maharashtra State Innovation Society


== References ==