Events from the year 1913 in Russia.


== Incumbents ==
Monarch – Nicholas II
Chairman of the Council of Ministers – Vladimir Nikolayevich Kokovtsov


== Events ==
January – Joseph Stalin (whose first article using his name is published this month) travels to Vienna to carry out research. Until he leaves on February 16 the city is home simultaneously to him, Adolf Hitler, Leon Trotsky, and Josip Broz Tito, alongside Alban Berg, Sigmund Freud, Ludwig and Paul Wittgenstein, and Carl Jung.
February – 300th anniversary of the Romanov dynasty.
Brusilov Expedition
Baymak
Benliahmet Railway Station
Bilozerske
Cuvânt Moldovenesc (magazine)
DLT (department store)
Glasul Basarabiei
Hotel Polonia Palace
Insignia of Saint Olga
Ismailiyya building
Kharkiv Choral Synagogue
Kiev Conservatory
Kronstadt Naval Cathedral
Mykolayiv Regional Museum of Local History
Qazaq
Regional Museum of local lore of Mykolaiv
Saint Petersburg Mosque
Sarıkamış railway station
Selim railway station
Shakhmaty v SSSR
Sochi railway station
Soğanlı Railway Station
Spaso House
Tallinn Power Plant
Di Tsayt (Saint Petersburg)
Vilnis
Vinnytsia Tramway


== Births ==
Valery Zhelobinsky - A renowned Russian pianist and composer, born on January 27, 1913, in Tambov, Russia. He made significant contributions to classical music before his untimely death in 1946.
Nikolai Amosov - A prominent Soviet and Ukrainian heart surgeon, inventor, and best-selling author. He was born on December 6, 1913, and is known for his pioneering work in heart surgery and his contributions to medical science.
Alexander Marinesko - A Soviet naval officer and submarine commander during World War II. He is best known for commanding the submarine S-13, which sank the German ship Wilhelm Gustloff in 1945, one of the largest maritime disasters in history.


== Deaths ==
April 24 – Vsevolod Abramovich, aviator (b. 1890)
May 6 – Elena Guro, painter and writer (b. 1877)
June 1 – Iosif Dubrovinsky, Bolshevik and comrade of Vladimir Lenin prior to the Russian Revolution (b. 1877)
July 20 – Vsevolod Rudnev, admiral (b. 1855)
August 11 – Vasily Avseenko, journalist and writer (b. 1842)
August 28 – Fyodor Kamensky, sculptor (b. 1836)
October 20 – Viktor Kirpichov, engineer and physicist (b. 1845)
November 30 – Alexandra Albedinskaya, courtier  (b. 1834)


== References ==

 Media related to 1913 in Russia at Wikimedia Commons