The Last Word Is Yours to Speak is the second studio album by American metalcore band Phinehas. The album was released on July 23, 2013, through Red Cord Records. It was produced by the band themselves and Chris Galvez. This is the first release with bassist Bryce Kelley and the last with guitarist Jason Combs.


== Background and promotion ==
The album was recorded in early 2013 shortly following the release of The Bridge Between. The album's name was announced on May 17 with the release of the lead single, "Fleshkiller". A music video was released for the song on July 19 through Red Cord's YouTube channel. The Last Word Is Yours to Speak was released on July 23 through Red Cord Records and proved to be successful upon release, charting on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart and Top Christian Albums. The Last Word Is Yours to Speak was also issued as a 12" vinyl, with 150 colored red and 250 colored gold. A music video for "Blood on My Knuckles" was released on May 19, 2014. With the announcement of the video's release, the band announced a contest in which the winner will win a signed drum head that was used in the recording of the album.


== Style ==
The Last Word Is Yours to Speak features a slight change in sound for the band, while still maintaining a metalcore sound. Whereas Thegodmachine featured fast-paced songs in the vein of thrash metal, this album features a strong Southern rock sound. Also, Sean McCulloch's singing is more clean and less gruff than on previous releases.


== Critical reception ==

The Last Word Is Yours to Speak has received positive reviews since its release, with critics praising the album. Decoy Music reviewer Nick Senior praised the album saying "the guitars really stand out from the crowd" and complemented the Southern rock influences. Senior also noted the post-metal influences on "Dyson Sphere", saying it "really drive[s] home the power of the track". However, he did note that a few of the tracks are "standard fare" and the breakdowns (while not overused) killed the momentum of a few songs. HM Magazine reviewer Wes Jaques also praised the album, saying "Fleshkiller" had "riffs in the style of Cannibal Corpse" as well as "non-rhythmic patterns like Hatebreed-gone-death metal". Jaques called the album a "solid release", citing "The Blessing and the Curse" as his favorite track. Indie Vision Music reviewer Brody B. also noted the Southern rock influence on "Blood on My Knuckles" and praised Humerian's drumming. Brody said the tracks "From a Burning Sun" and "The Deepest of Graves" could have easily been lift out of the album, but did say the breakdown from the former "is really slick". He concluded his review by saying the band "are the real deal and meant to break free from this monotonous music scene into the limelight."


== Track listing ==


== Personnel ==
Credits adapted from AllMusic.

Phinehas
Sean McCulloch – lead vocals, guitar engineering
Jason Combs – guitars
Bryce Kelley – bass, backing vocals
Lee Humerian – drums, backing vocals, engineering
Additional musicians
Brennan Chaulk of Haste the Day – guest vocals on track 8
Garrett Russell of Silent Planet – guest vocals on track 9
Drew Williams – additional vocals
Additional personnel
Chris Galvez – engineering, production, additional vocals
Phinehas – production
Joey Matthews – executive production
Joe Wohletz – mastering, mixing, editing
Joel Wanasek – mastering, mixing
Chris McCulloch – handwriting
Trent Tieso – artwork


== Charts ==


== References ==