This is a list of notable individuals born in the United States of Lebanese ancestry and/or people of Lebanese and American dual nationality who live or lived in the United States.


== Arts and entertainment ==


=== Artists ===
Etel Adnan – painter, poet
Margot Douaihy – writer
Chawky Frenn – painter and art professor
Kahlil Gibran – aka Kahlil G. Gibran, artist, sculptor
Nabil Kanso – painter
Sam Maloof – woodworker
Juman Malouf – costume designer, artist, illustrator, writer, and the romantic partner of film director Wes Anderson.


=== Beauty pageant contestants ===
Rima Fakih – Miss USA 2010


=== Entertainment personalities ===
Adam Amen – reality star, from TLC program All American Muslim
Alexander Koch – actor of Lebanese, Italian and German descent
Alyssa Farah Griffin - co-host of ABC’s The View
Amy Yasbeck – actress (father was of Lebanese descent)
Anissa Jones – child actor (mother was of Lebanese descent)
Callie Khouri – Oscar-winning screenwriter
Casey Kasem – radio personality, American Top 40 franchise; voiceover actor (cartoon series Scooby-Doo, Transformers)
Catherine Keener – actress, mother of Lebanese descent
Celeste Thorson – actress, model, activist, screenwriter
Chris Romano – actor, producer, director (father of Lebanese heritage, born Shaheen)
Cristina Vee – singer and voice actor
Demián Bichir – Mexican-American film actor of Lebanese heritage
Dan Jbara – television and film producer
Danny Thomas – actor
David Yazbek – musician and composer famous for the Broadway musical The Full Monty
Diane Rehm – host and executive producer of The Diane Rehm Show on National Public Radio
Edy Ganem – actress (parents are of Lebanese descent)
Elie Samaha – film producer
Emeraude Toubia – actress (father is Lebanese)
Emile Kuri – Mexican-born American Oscar-winning art director
Frank Lackteen – actor
Gregory Jbara – television and film actor
George Nader – actor, uncle of Michael Nader
George Noory – radio host (radio program Coast to Coast AM)
Haaz Sleiman – actor (series Nurse Jackie; film The Visitor)
Hank the Angry Drunken Dwarf – radio and television personality
James Stacy – film and television actor
Jamie Farr – actor (sitcom M*A*S*H)
Jamie Gray Hyder – actress, model (father of Lebanese descent)
Jane Wiedlin – musician, actress (mother was of Lebanese descent)
Jenna Dewan – actress (paternal grandfather was of Lebanese descent)
Kristen Doute – television personality known for Vanderpump Rules
Joan Alexander – actress known for her role as Lois Lane
John A. Kuri – author and writer, film and television producer, and director
John Leguizamo – actor (maternal grandfather was Lebanese)
Kathy Najimy – actress
Kerri Kasem – radio and television host; daughter of Casey Kasem
Khrystyne Haje – actress (sitcom Head of the Class)
Lili Estefan – Cuban-American television personality, niece of Emilio Estefan
Marlo Thomas – actress (father was of Lebanese descent)
Mario Kassar – filmmaker, founder of Carolco Pictures
Mary Zilba – television personality and singer
Mayssa Karaa – Grammy-nominated singer
Mia Khalifa – pornographic actress and adult model
Michael Ansara – stage, screen, and voice actor (Lebanese born American)
Michael Nader – actor, All My Children and Dynasty
Mo Gallini – actor (father of Lebanese descent)
Paola Turbay – Colombian-American actress, model, beauty queen and television presenter
Paul Anka – singer-songwriter, actor, producer
Peter Macdissi – film and television actor
Raya Meddine – actress of Lebanese descent
Robert Romanus – actor and musician
Rose Abdoo – comedian, actress
Rowan Blanchard – actress (father of Lebanese descent)
Salma Hayek – Mexican-American actress (paternal grandfather was Lebanese)
Senta Moses – actress known for her role in Home Alone
Shannon Elizabeth – actress (father of Lebanese descent)
Terrence Malick – filmmaker, of part Lebanese descent
Tom Shadyac – film director (of 3/4 Lebanese descent)
Tony Shalhoub – actor (Monk)
Tony Thomas – producer (father was of Lebanese descent)
Vince Vaughn – actor (paternal grandmother was of Lebanese descent)
Wentworth Miller – actor, maternal great-grandmother of Lebanese descent
Yasmeen Fletcher – actress and musician, mother of Lebanese descent
Yasmine Al Massri – Lebanese-born American actress


=== Fashion designers ===
Joseph Abboud – fashion designer
Reem Acra – fashion designer
Norma Kamali – fashion designer
Elie Saab – fashioner designer


=== Musicians ===
Andrew Bazzi – pop musician
Dick Dale – rock guitarist and surf music pioneer
Emilio Estefan – Cuban-American musician and producer; husband of Gloria Estefan
G. E. Smith – lead guitarist in the band Hall & Oates; musical director of Saturday Night Live
Hamed Sinno – Lebanese-American graphic designer, singer-songwriter of the band Mashrou'Leila
Jack Barakat – guitarist of the band All Time Low
Jane Wiedlin – musician, singer-songwriter, and actress; best known as a member of the all-female new wave band The Go-Go's
John Dolmayan – Lebanese-American of Armenian descent, drummer of band System of a Down
Kat Dahlia – singer-songwriter, rapper
Mohammed El-Bakkar – tenor singer, oud player, and conductor
Nadia Azzi – pianist
Paul Anka – singer-songwriter (both parents of Lebanese descent)
Paul Jabara – composer
Neil Sedaka – pop/rock singer, pianist, composer and record producer
Ron Affif – jazz guitarist and musician
Rosalind Elias – opera singer renowned for her time in the Metropolitan Opera
Serj Tankian – Lebanese-American of Armenian descent, lead singer of band System of a Down
Soraya – Colombian-American singer
Tiffany – singer
Tino Coury – singer-songwriter and producer
Tiny Tim – folk singer
Tyler Joseph – lead singer of Twenty One Pilots


== Legal professionals ==
Tom Ajamie - civil litigation attorney
Eva M. Mack – attorney who worked on the California civil rights case Davis v. Carter
Jeanine Pirro – former district attorney of Westchester County, New York


== Business ==
Alec Gores – entrepreneur
Caroline Ghosn – entrepreneur
Charles Elachi – director of Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Clifford Antone – founder of Antone's blues club in Austin, Texas
Debra Cafaro – CEO of Ventas Inc., a healthcare real estate investment trust
Fares D. Noujaim – business executive
Frédéric Fekkai – French-American hairdresser and founder of Frédéric Fekkai salons and hair products
George Joseph – founder of Mercury Insurance Group
George J. Maloof Jr. – businessman and owner of the Sacramento Monarchs, Sacramento Kings and the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas
George J. Maloof Sr. – businessman and former owner of the Houston Rockets
Jacques Nasser – former CEO of Ford Motor Company
Jean Succar Kuri – businessman
Joe Jamail – attorney and businessman
Joe Robbie – attorney and original owner of the Miami Dolphins
John J. Mack – former CEO of investment bank Morgan Stanley (2005–2009)
Joseph J. Jacobs – former chairman and founder of the Jacobs Engineering Group
Madeleine A. Pickens – business executive
Magid Abraham – market research expert and businessman
Manuel Moroun – businessman and the owner of the Ambassador Bridge
Michael Boulos – business executive and partner of Tiffany Trump
Moose Scheib – founder and CEO of LoanMod.com
Paul Orfalea – founder of Kinko's
Richard Rainwater (1944–2015) – investor and philanthropist
Richard Rashid – founder of Microsoft Research
Robert Khuzami – former director of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
Thomas J. Barrack Jr. – businessman and founder of Colony Capital
Tony Fadell – product development manager at Apple Inc.
Tony Tamer – founder and co-CEO of H.I.G. Capital
Ziad Makkawi - investor and entrepreneur


== Education and academics ==
Charbel Farhat – Vivian Church Hoff Professor of Aircraft Structures in the School of Engineering and inaugural James and Anna Marie Spilker Chair of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, at Stanford University; Member of the National Academy of Engineering (US); Member of the Royal Academy of Engineering (UK); and Member of the Lebanese Academy of Sciences
Jacqueline S. Stephen – author, editor, Fulbright alumna, researcher, faculty at Mercer University, Atlanta Georgia USA
Joseph E. Aoun – President of Northeastern University
Nafe Katter – professor of theatre, University of Connecticut
Robert Khayat – Chancellor of the University of Mississippi
Eugene Nassar – author, literary critic and professor
Donna Shalala – U.S. Representative from Florida, former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services and former President of the University of Miami
Phoebe Stanton – faculty at Johns Hopkins University from 1955 until 1982, art historian, urban planner for the city of Baltimore.
Gabriel Hawawini – emeritus professor of finance and former holder of the Henry Grunfeld Chair in Investment Banking at INSEAD


== History ==
Akram Fouad Khater – professor, author, expert on Lebanese-American studies
Philip Khuri Hitti – historian of Arab culture and history


== Journalism ==
Anthony Shadid – foreign correspondent for The New York Times and earlier The Boston Globe
Brian Karem – journalist and White House correspondent
Helen Thomas – journalist who covered every U.S. president from 1961 to 2010
Jad Abumrad – radio host, composer, and producer, founder and co-host of the syndicated public radio program Radiolab
Jim Avila – senior correspondent for ABC News
Leila Fadel – journalist for National Public Radio
Lucie Salhany – first woman to head a broadcast television network in 1993 in the position as Chairman of Fox Broadcasting Company
Octavia Nasr – former television journalist for CNN
Paula Faris – journalist (father was of Lebanese descent)
Raghida Dergham – columnist and senior diplomatic correspondent for the London-based Al Hayat
Sara Ganim – CNN journalist (father is of Lebanese descent)
Serena Shim – journalist
Tamsen Fadal – television journalist
Walid Phares – security and anti-terrorism expert


== Medicine ==
Amin J. Barakat – physician, known for the diagnosis of Barakat syndrome
Charles Sophy – psychiatrist
Daniel Amen – psychiatrist and author
George Hatem – "Ma Haide," a founder of the public health system in China
M. Amin Arnaout – nephrologist and physician-scientist
Michael DeBakey – heart surgeon, medical innovator
Paul Nassif – facial plastic surgeon, co-star on the television series Botched


== Military ==
Alfred Naifeh – U.S. Navy lieutenant posthumously awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal in WWII and namesake of a U.S. Navy ship, USS Naifeh (DE-352)
Ernest "Iron Mike" Massad – U.S. Army major general
George Joulwan – retired U.S. Army general
James Jabara – first American jet ace
John Abizaid – retired general in the United States Army
Michael A. Monsoor – U.S. Navy SEAL awarded Medal of Honor after being killed during the Iraq War


== Politics ==


=== Activists ===
Jahaira DeAlto – domestic violence victims and LGBT community activist and advocate
Brigitte Gabriel – founder of non-profit political organizations American Congress For Truth and ACT! for America; author; formerly journalist in Israel working for World News
Candy Lightner – activist and founder of Mothers Against Drunk Drivers
James Zogby – founder of the Arab-American Institute
Jill Kelley – international advocate, socialite, and former diplomat
John Zogby – pollster; founder of Zogby International


=== Politicians ===
Abraham Kazen – former U.S. representative from Texas
Alex Azar – former United States Secretary of Health and Human Services
Charles Boustany – former U.S. representative from Louisiana
Charlie Crist – U.S. representative from Florida and former governor of Florida
Chris Greeley – former Maine state representative
Chris John – former U.S. representative from Louisiana
Chris Sununu – Governor of New Hampshire
Darin LaHood – Republican representative from Illinois
Darrell Issa – U.S. representative from California
David Karem – member of Kentucky Senate from 1976 to 2004
Debbie Mucarsel-Powell – U.S. representative from Florida
Donna Shalala – U.S. representative from Florida and former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services
Edward M. Gabriel – former U.S. ambassador to Morocco
Francis Slay – former mayor of Saint Louis
Garret Graves – U.S. representative from Louisiana
George A. Kasem – former U.S. representative from California
George J. Mitchell – former U.S. senator from Maine
Gwen Graham – former U.S. representative from Florida
James Abdnor – former U.S. senator and U.S. representative from South Dakota
James Abourezk – former U.S. senator from South Dakota
Jeanine Pirro – politician, judge and television host
John Baldacci – former governor of Maine
John E. Sununu – former U.S. senator and U.S. representative from New Hampshire
John H. Sununu – former White House Chief of Staff; former governor of New Hampshire
Katcho Achadjian – former California State Assembly member, of Armenian descent
Manuel Maloof – former U.S. government official and businessman
Mary Rose Oakar – former U.S. representative from Ohio
Nick Rahall – former U.S. representative from West Virginia
Nico LaHood – Bexar County district attorney, Texas
Pat Danner – former U.S. representative from Missouri
Philip Habib – former U.S. ambassador and envoy
Ralph Abraham – U.S. representative from Louisiana
Ralph Nader – political activist and former U.S. presidential candidate (Green Party)
Ray LaHood – former U.S. Transportation Secretary and former U.S. representative from Illinois
Richard L. Hanna – former U.S. representative from New York
Richard Ieyoub – former Attorney General of Louisiana
Selwa Roosevelt – former U.S. government official
Spencer Abraham – former U.S. senator from Michigan
Suzanne Haik Terrell – former Louisiana elections commissioner
Toby Moffett – former U.S. representative from Connecticut
Victor G. Atiyeh – former governor of Oregon
Vincent Sheheen – member of the South Carolina senate
Sam H. Zakhem – member of the Colorado State House of Representatives, Colorado state senator, former U.S. ambassador to Bahrain under Ronald Reagan


=== Other personalities ===
Adele Khoury Graham – educator and former first lady of the State of Florida
George Noory – radio host of Coast to Coast AM; author; entertainer
Joseph Farah – author and journalist
Nassim Nicholas Taleb – best-selling author, risk expert and statistician, university professor, and former trader and business person
Robert Khuzami, U.S. deputy attorney for Southern District of New York
Timothy Massad – U.S. Treasury Department official and corporate lawyer
Jirair Ratevosian – acting chief of staff to the United States Global AIDS Coordinator (2022–23)
Victoria Reggie Kennedy – attorney and widow of U.S. Senator Edward Kennedy


== Sciences ==
Anthony Atala – director of the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine
Charbel Farhat – director, Army High Performance Computing Research Center, Stanford University, and Member of National Academy of Engineering
Charles Elachi – director of NASA Jet Propulsion Labs
Doris Daou – NASA astronomer
Elias Corey – 1990 Nobel Prize winner in Chemistry
Christa McAuliffe – teacher and astronaut who was killed on the Space Shuttle Challenger; mother was of partial Lebanese descent
Hassan Kamel Al-Sabbah – technology innovator
Michael Debakey – doctor and heart surgeon, medical innovator


== Sports ==


=== Athletes ===
Abe Mickal – football player for LSU
Bobby Rahal – professional car racer and team owner
Charley Zivic – professional boxer
Damien Sandow – professional wrestler in the WWE
David Azzi – professional football player
Doug Flutie – former professional football player
Fred Saigh – lawyer; real estate investor; owner of the American professional baseball franchise the St. Louis Cardinals
Graham Rahal – professional car racer
Jackson Vroman – former professional basketball player and member of Lebanon's national basketball team (naturalized Lebanese citizen)
Jeff George – former NFL quarterback for the Indianapolis Colts
Jim Harrick – former head coach of the University of Georgia Bull Dogs
Joe Lahoud – former Major League Baseball outfielder
Joe Vogel – professional basketball player and member of Lebanon's national basketball team
John Elway – Hall of Fame NFL quarterback for the Denver Broncos
John Grabow – former Major League Baseball pitcher
John Jaha – former first baseman in Major League Baseball, played for the Milwaukee Brewers and Oakland Athletics
Johnny Manziel – professional football player
Jordyn Wieber – Olympic gymnast and gold medallist
Liz Carmouche – mixed martial artist
Matt Freije – ex-NBA player and member of Lebanon national basketball team
Matt Kalil – professional football player
Mikie Mahtook – Major League Baseball outfielder
Mikie Mahtook – Major League Baseball outfielder
Patrick Maroon – ice hockey player for the Edmonton Oilers in the NHL
Paul Rabil – former professional lacrosse player
Petey Sarron – former featherweight boxing champion
Rich Kotite – former National Football League player and coach
Robert Saleh – professional football coach and head coach of the New York Jets
Robert Watkins – former professional football player; of African-American and Lebanese descent
Rony Seikaly – former professional basketball player in the NBA and for both the U.S. and Lebanon's national basketball team
Ryan Kalil – professional football player
Sabu – professional wrestler, real name Terry Brunk
Sage Karam – professional car racer
Samir Bannout – former professional bodybuilder and winner of Mr. Olympia title in 1983
Skandor Akbar – former professional wrestler
Soony Saad – professional soccer forward player
Steve Kerr – retired professional basketball player and current head coach of the Golden State Warriors
Toni Breidinger – professional race car driver


=== World Series of Poker champions ===
Ihsan "Sammy" Farha – three-time WSOP-bracelet winner
Jennifer Shahade – two-time United States Women's champion; has the FIDE title of woman grandmaster
Kassem "Freddy" Deeb – two-time WSOP-bracelet winner
Joe Hachem – WSOP main event winner and a WPT championship winner (1 of 6 players in the world to win both)


== Writers ==
Ameen Rihani – author
D. H. Melhem – poet, novelist, and editor
Geoff Johns – comic book writer
Khalil Gibran – author and philosopher
Lee Francis – poet
Mikha'il Na'ima – author and poet
Nassim Nicholas Taleb – essayist
Paula Gunn Allen – Native American poet and activist
Rabih Alameddine – author
Raymond Khoury – novelist and screenwriter
Saree Makdisi – author and literary critic
Stephen Karam – playwright
Vance Bourjaily – novelist
William Peter Blatty – writer, screenwriter


== See also ==
Lebanese Americans
Lebanon–United States relations
List of Lebanese people
List of Lebanese people (diaspora)
Arab Americans
Lebanese Canadian


== References ==