Lieutenant General Tarun Kumar Aich, PVSM, AVSM (born 19 October 1964) is a retired General Officer of the Indian Army. He last served as the 4th Deputy Chief of the Army Staff (Strategy). He is the first officer from the Madras Regiment to become the Deputy Chief of Army Staff DCOAS (Strategy), assuming office from Lt Gen M. V. Suchindra Kumar on 14 Mar 2023.
Previously, he was the Director General of Military Intelligence. Prior to that, he was GOC Trishakti Corps (XXXIII Corps). He earlier served as the Director General of National Cadet Corps.


== Early life and education ==
He has completed his schooling from The Frank Anthony Public School, Delhi and High school from Delhi Public School, Delhi. He is an alumnus of the National Defence Academy, Khadakwasla where he graduated with the Degree of Bachelor of Arts and the Indian Military Academy, Dehradun. He is also an alumnus of the Defence Services Staff College, Wellington and Army War College, Mhow. He had undergone the Command and General Staff Course (CGSC) at Hamburg, Germany. He is a Postgraduate and holds an MPhil in Defence and Strategic Studies from the Madras University.


== Military career ==
He was commissioned into 16th battalion of the Madras Regiment (Travancore) in June 1986 from the Indian Military Academy. He has commanded his battalion in the Siachen Glacier and in the intense counter terrorism environment of the Valley Sector in Kashmir. He has held the appointment of the  Brigade Major of a Brigade in Counter Insurgency Operations (CI Ops) and General Staff Officer-1 in the Military Intelligence Directorate. He has assumed command as the Colonel (General Staff) of a forward assault formation in the plains sector, served as Colonel General Staff (Planning) at Command Headquarters, and held the esteemed post of Brigadier General Staff at the prestigious Indian Military Academy, Commandant of the High Altitude Warfare School at Gulmarg. He also commanded the 12 Reorganized Army Plains Infantry Division (RAPID) in the desert sector.
On being promoted to the rank of Lieutenant general, he took over as the 33rd Director General of National Cadet Corps on 1 January 2021.
On October 22, 2021, he took over as the GOC XXXIII Corps succeeding Lieutenant General Ajai Kumar Singh. On Dec 11, 2021, he set up a 400 litres of oxygen per minute oxygen generation plant, at the base hospital in Bengdubi near Bagdogra in Siliguri On May 16, 2022, Lt Gen Tarun Kumar Aich, the GOC of Trishakti Corps, and Avinash Khare, the VC of Sikkim University signed the MoU for the Eastern Command Tibetology cadre course (ECTCC). On Sept 20, 2022, he inaugurated The Avalanche Monitoring Radar (TAMR) operational in North Sikkim. It is first of its kind radar in India installed jointly by the Indian Army and Defence Geoinformatics and Research Establishment (DGRE) located at an altitude of 15,000 feet. After relinquishing the command of Trishakti Corps, he moved to the Army headquarters and assumed the appointment of Director General Military Intelligence.
On 14 March 2023, he assumed the appointment as the 4th and the current Deputy Chief of the Army Staff (Strategy) succeeding Lt Gen M. V. Suchindra Kumar.
He supernatuated on 31 October 2024.


== Awards and decorations ==
He has been awarded the Param Vishisht Seva Medal in 2024 and the Ati Vishisht Seva Medal in 2021. The general officer has been awarded the Chief of Army Staff's Commendation thrice.


== Dates of rank ==


== Gallery ==

		
			
			
		
		
			
			
		


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Tarun Kumar Aich at Wikimedia Commons

www.indianarmy.nic.in/
www.pmindia.gov.in
www.nccorissa.org
President of India presents AVSM to Lt. Gen. Tarun Kumar Aich