Kevork Shadoyan (Armenian: Գևորգ Շադոյան; Arabic: كيفورك شادويان; born 14 February 1974, Aleppo, Syria) is a Syrian/Armenian fashion designer, tailor, art-fashion teacher, and interior designer.


== Early life ==
Shadoyan was born in 1974 in Aleppo, Syria to an Armenian family. His father was a tailor in Aleppo and worked with clothing during his teenage years.
Kevork moved to Beirut to study fashion after school, and eventually received offers to work on dowry dresses in Saudi Arabia. When he moved back to Aleppo, he opened a storefront.


== Education ==
Shadoyan was educated in the Armenian schools of Aleppo including Karen Jeppe Gemaran School. In 1997 he graduated from the "College Artistique de la Mode Moderne" institute in Lebanon as a designer and tailor. Afterwards he worked with famous Lebanese fashion designers.
In 2004, he graduated from the "Yerevan State Academy of Fine Arts" with an honor degree to get qualified in Decorative Design of Textile Manufacture, where he was specialized in the history of the Armenian costumes and ornaments.


== Career ==
He has begun his fashion shows in Lebanon, Syria and then Armenia "Fashion week". 

In 2004 he exhibited his first collection "The Modern Armenian Wedding" in USA (Boston, LA, Houston).
In 2005 he exhibited his second collection "The Golden Autumn" in USA (LA, Houston).
In 2006 he exhibited his collection "The Armenian Traditional Garments Today" in Sydney-Australia.
Besides his many individual fashion shows in Armenia in 2006, he participated in the Prêt à Porter Yerevan, then in a contest in Hong Kong.
In 2006 he was offered a professional title in Moscow for participating in the "Fashion Assembly".
In 2007 he prepared the final dance costumes for the "Navasart Ensemble" in Paris, and he exhibited his works during the festival there.
In 2007 he exhibited his paintings and his latest collection "The Armenian Silk Road" in Sydney-Australia.
In 2008, he showed the newest collection; Autumn/Winter 2008–2009 in Lviv Fashion Week, Ukraine.
In 2014 Shadoyan's spring / summer 2015 runway show was unveiled on one of the many catwalks of Belarus Fashion Week (BFW).
Oriflame Fashion Night 2015 night was organized in the heart of Yerevan, at Swan Lake showing new collections by well-known designers in Armenia. Oriflame has inspired stylists for the creation of the hair-dos and make-up of models.
In 2015 Estet Fashion Week "Renaissance" collection of national costumes, which received the Best Foreign Collection Award at Estet Fashion Week in Moscow.


== Reincarnation ==
The latest collection of the Shadoyan Couture House is called "Reincarnation" and is dedicated to the Armenian Genocide Centennial. The collection only includes Armenian national costumes. 
Syrian-Armenian fashion designer Kevork Shadoyan presented his Renaissance collection of late 18th century and early 19th century Armenian national costumes devoted to the Centennial of the Armenian Genocide at Ararat Armenian Sport and Cultural Union of New Julfa, reports Yeranush Tahmazian to Hayern Aysor from Isfahan. 


== Awards ==
Shadoyan won the Best Foreign Collection Award during Estet Fashion Week in Moscow, Russia.


== References ==