The AEW Continental Championship is a men's professional wrestling championship created and promoted by the American promotion All Elite Wrestling (AEW). Established on November 18, 2023, the title has a special attribute in that it is defended under Continental Rules in which no one is allowed at ringside and outside interference is strictly prohibited. The reigning champion is Kazuchika Okada, who is in his first reign. He won the title by defeating Eddie Kingston on the March 20, 2024, episode of Dynamite.
The title is also the prize of the AEW Continental Classic (C2), an annual round-robin tournament that begins at the end of November and culminates at the AEW Worlds End pay-per-view event in late December. The champion at the time of the tournament is automatically entered and defends the title in the C2. Eddie Kingston became the first ever Continental Champion after winning the inaugural tournament in December 2023. Kingston was subsequently also recognized by AEW as the American Triple Crown Champion, also referred to as the Continental Crown, as he simultaneously held the ROH World Championship of sister promotion Ring of Honor (ROH) and the Strong Openweight Championship of partner promotion New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW). After Kazuchika Okada won the Continental Championship in March 2024, it was separated from the Triple Crown.


== History ==

On November 11, 2023, the American professional wrestling promotion All Elite Wrestling (AEW) announced a tournament called the Continental Classic (C2). AEW president Tony Khan and AEW wrestler Bryan Danielson announced that the tournament would begin on the November 22, 2023, episode of Dynamite, lasting six weeks and held across episodes of Dynamite, Rampage, and Collision, and then concluding at the Worlds End pay-per-view (PPV) event on December 30. It was also announced that the winner of the tournament would become the inaugural holder of the AEW Continental Championship.
Eddie Kingston became the inaugural Continental Champion by defeating Jon Moxley in the final of the C2 at Worlds End. Kingston was also declared the American Triple Crown Champion (also referred to as the Continental Crown) upon winning the Continental Championship, as he simultaneously held the ROH World Championship of sister promotion Ring of Honor (ROH) and the Strong Openweight Championship of partner promotion New Japan Pro-Wrestling (NJPW). By being part of the Triple Crown Championship, the Continental Championship was recognized by AEW, ROH, and NJPW, allowing it to be defended in all three promotions.
On the March 20, 2024, episode of Dynamite, the championship was defended for the first time by itself, where Kazuchika Okada defeated Kingston to win the title. This in turn separated the Continental Championship from the Triple Crown. Tony Khan then clarified the rules of the championship. Title matches are held under Continental Rules, which are the same rules that were used during the C2 in which no one is allowed at ringside and outside interference is strictly prohibited. He also re-clarified that whoever is champion coming out of November's Full Gear PPV, they would automatically be entered into the C2 and would defend the title in the tournament.


== Reigns ==

As of December 4, 2024, there have been two reigns. Eddie Kingston was the inaugural champion, which was the shortest reign at 81 days, while Kazuchika Okada's ongoing reign is the longest at 259+ days. Kingston is also the oldest champion at 42 years old, while Okada is the youngest at 36.
Kazuchika Okada is the current champion in his first reign. He defeated Eddie Kingston on the March 20, 2024, episode of Dynamite in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.


== See also ==
Secondary championships in All Elite Wrestling


== References ==


== External links ==

Official AEW Continental Championship Title History