Love Like the Falling Petals is a 2022 Japanese film directed by Yoshihiro Fukagawa and written by Tomoko Yoshida, based on the 2017 novel of the same by Keisuke Uyama. It stars Kento Nakajima and Honoka Matsumoto.


== Plot ==
A budding photographer, Haruto, meets a kind, young hairdresser named Misaki. Misaki reveals that he was her very first client, which he finds endearing, and falls in love with her at first sight. Haruto bends the truth and introduces himself as a photographer.
Haruto continues to return to get his hair cut by her, and the two become close. One day, Haruto decides to ask Misaki on a date, bringing up the topic while getting his hair cut. Incidentally, he moves his head and causes Misaki to cut the tip of his earlobe, making him bleed profusely and pass out.
A few days later, a frantic Misaki meets with Haruto to apologize for the injury. He brings up the question of a date, to which she agrees. Misaki’s protective older brother does not approve, however, as he only wants what is best for her.
They go on a date to see cherry blossoms, where Haruto reveals that he is not currently a photographer and is at a crossroads. Misaki becomes furious that he stopped pursuing his dream and advises Haruto not give up so easily just because things get hard. Haruto is flabbergasted, but takes her advice seriously, determined to become someone she can be proud of. He gets a job at a photo studio and continues to work hard to prove himself to Misaki. He then asks her out again and she accepts. They have their first date and have such a great time, they start to date more seriously. 
Their happy romance comes to a halt, as Misaki falls ill, leading to a doctor’s visit where she is diagnosed with progeroid syndromes: a disease that ages her extremely fast, deteriorating her body at an alarming rate. Misaki’s case is extreme, leaving her with less than a year to endure the debilitating symptoms.
Misaki, devastated, goes into seclusion and cuts Haruto off. She also quits her hairdresser job, pretending to have found work elsewhere. After a few months of ghosting him, she lies and pretends to have found someone else, breaking his heart.
She is cared for by her brother, who tries everything to cure her, but to no avail. They even try out expensive electromagnetic therapy done by an external clinic that promised results. Unfortunately, the clinic turns out to be a scam taking advantage of vulnerable patients seeking hope.
A few months into the year, Misaki’s disease continues to progress rapidly, slowing her bodily functions, and making her lose hope in life. Although heartbroken, Haruto tries to move on from Misaki. He concentrates on his photography and bears the fruits of his efforts, which helps in his journey of healing.


== Cast ==
Kento Nakajima
Honoka Matsumoto


== References ==


== External links ==
Love Like the Falling Petals on Netflix 
Love Like the Falling Petals at IMDb