St Cadoc's Youth Club is a Scottish football club based in Newton Mearns, East Renfrewshire. They were formed in 1987 by David Jones, janitor at St Cadoc's Primary School and have grown into a large community sports club playing football and netball.
The club formed an adult side and successfully applied to join the newly founded West of Scotland Football League for the 2020–21 season. As part of the facility requirements for the league, they entered an agreement to groundshare with fellow West of Scotland League club Benburb at New Tinto Park in Govan, Glasgow. 
St Cadoc’s have enjoyed recent back-to-back promotions, where they currently play in the West of Scotland Premier Division.


== History ==
St Cadoc's YC were formed in 1987 by the primary school janitor, David Jones. The club is one of Scotland's largest clubs in terms of the number of registered players the club holds from all age groups. St Cadoc's first entered senior football at the beginning of the 2020-21 season, after being accepted into the inaugural West of Scotland Football League. During their first season, the COVID-19 pandemic hit, curtailing the season, with the Cads sitting in 4th place with only 8 games played in Conference B. 
For the 2021-22 season, St Cadoc's enjoyed success in their first full season, finishing 2nd place in Conference B. This meant that the club qualified for the new West of Scotland First Division, tier 7 in the Scottish pyramid system. The club also reached the Strathclyde Demolition Cup final, losing 2-0 to Drumchapel United at Buffs Park, Kilwinning. 
In 2022-23, St Cadoc's finished in consecutive 2nd place finishes, 1 point behind league winners, Gartcairn. This gained the club promotion to the West of Scotland Premier Division, tier 6 in the Scottish pyramid system. 
The 2023-24 season brought a huge turnaround in players and staff. Former East Kilbride interim manager and coach Martin Fellowes was drafted in with his backroom staff, who followed from the Lowland League club, to help the Cads tackle their first season in the Premier Division. At the beginning of this season, the club gained their SJFA licence which allowed them to compete in the Scottish Junior Cup for the first time, reaching the quarter-finals stage, before losing to Johnstone Burgh on penalties. St Cadoc’s ended their debut season in the Premier Division with a 3rd place finish, 6 points behind champions Beith Juniors.
The 2024-25 season brought the club its first piece of senior silverware, winning the Strathclyde Demoliton Cup. The match took place at Broadwood Stadium against Forth Wanderers which finished 8-2 to St Cadoc’s. This qualifies the club into the Cup Winners’ Shield against the East’s Alex Jack Cup winners, Whitburn Juniors and the South’s Alba Cup winners, Lochar Thistle for a place in the 2025-26 Scottish Cup.


== Management Team ==
As of 15 October 2024


== Current squad ==
As of 6 December 2024 

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


=== On loan ===

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


== Grounds ==
From 2020-2022, St Cadoc’s played their home matches at McKenna Park, the home of St Anthony’s. From the 2022-23 season onwards, St Cadoc’s have been ground-sharing at New Tinto Park, the home of Benburb.
New Tinto Park, is located just north of both the railway and the M8 motorway and fitted with 3G artificial turf.
New Tinto Park has also been used as the home ground for Rangers W.F.C. from 2015 to 2019. Rossvale, now known as Caledonian Locomotives, and most recently, Queen’s Park Women.


== Honours ==
Strathclyde Demolition Cup
Winners: 2024-25
Runners-up: 2021-22


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website