The Trotskyist Fraction – Fourth International (TF-FI) is a political international of Trotskyist political organizations that claim to adhere to the political legacy of the Fourth International. 


== History ==
It has its origin in the expelled Internationalist Bolshevik Faction of the Movement for Socialism (MAS). MAS was the Argentine section of the International Workers League (IWL-FI). The Internationalist Bolshevik Faction regarded itself initially as an "external fraction" of the MAS/IWL-FI who had been wrongly expelled, and demanded the overturning of its expulsion.
The Internationalist Bolshevik Faction became the Socialist Workers' Party (PTS) in 1988. In 1989 the Partido Obrero Socialista (POS) in Mexico, later renamed Liga de Trabajadores Socialistas (LTS), was also expelled from the IWL-FI. The PTS and the POS founded the Internationalist Faction of the IWL-FI (IFIWL-FI) in 1989.  
From 1988 to 1990 the PTS had three splits: first when a number of militants returned to the Argentinian Movement for Socialism (MAS) party, then when another group of militants sympathized with the British Workers Revolutionary Party (Worker Press) and the third when supporters of León Pérez (former member of the International Secretariat of the IWL-FI) decided to follow a mass party perspective (as opposed to a vanguard party).
These splits forced the PTS to make a balance and self-criticism. This resulted in a further development. The PTS and the IFIWL-FI questioned the "update" of the Transitional Program that Nahuel Moreno, the leader of the IWL-FI, had made (his so-called theory of "Democratic Revolution"). The PTS and the IFIWL-FI regarded Moreno's update as an "anti-Trotskyist revision" of Leon Trotsky's Theory of Permanent Revolution. The PTS and the IFIWL-FI broke with Moreno's political tradition/heritage, ideology (termed Morenoism) and tendency (the IWL-FI). The IFIWL-FI was renamed Internationalist Faction.
In 1996 the Trotskyist Fraction - International Strategy was founded. By 2004 it consisted of  the PTS of Argentina, the LTS of Mexico (current name MTS), the LOR-CI of Bolivia, the Estratégia Revolucionaria, current name Movimento Revolucionário de Trabalhadores (MRT), of Brazil and the Clase contra Clase, current name Partido de Trabajadores Revolucionarios (PTR), of Chile as well as some militant sympathizers in Europe. In 2004, in its second international conference, the Trotskyist Fraction - International Strategy decided to change its name to Trotskyist Fraction - Fourth International (TF-FI). Following the economic crisis and demonstrations in several countries, the TF-FI grew in Latin America and Europe, and its manifesto of 2013 called for the formation of a new grouping: An International Movement for a Socialist Revolution - Fourth International. The manifesto was updated in 2021, due to new developments in the international arena.


== National sections ==
The largest full section of the TF-FI is the PTS in Argentina. After the 2023 Argentine general election the PTS has four national deputies in the National Congress of Argentina: Nicolás del Caño, Christian Castillo, Myriam Bregman, and Alejandro Vilca.
The Organización Socialista Revolucionaria (Costa Rica), the Frazione Internazionalista Rivoluzionaria (Italy), and the Corriente Socialista de las y los Trabajadores (Peru) became full sections of the TF-FI after endorsing the TF-FI manifesto of 2013.
In 2022 the Révolution Permanente in France became a full section of the TF-FI. Le Journal du Dimanche noted the rising domination of the Révolution Permanente and its youth group, the Le Poing Levé, during the strikes against the French pension reform of 2023. Le Monde remarked that the Révolution Permanente's "media visibility" was "disproportionate" to its size during the 2023 protests. According to Arrêt sur images the website of the Révolution Permanente has become indispensable to striking workers. According to  La Croix, Adèle Haenel is an activist of Révolution Permanente, and Assa Traoré and Frédéric Lordon are supporters of the organization.  

Former sections:

 France Groupe Communiste Revolutionaire Internationaliste (Revolutionary Internationalist Communist Group) (CRI) - They were admitted in 2008 as sympathiser section of TF-FI, but after the creation of the New Anticapitalist Party (NPA) they decided to dissolve within the CLAIRE Tendency of the NPA (acronym for "Tendency for Communism and self-organized, internationalist and revolutionary struggle"). Later, in 2010, the TF-FI militants became part of "The Collective for a Revolutionary Tendency" inside NPA. In April 2013 the "Revolutionary Communist Current" (CCR) was founded by the TF-FI militants. The CCR was expelled from the NPA in June 2021. In December 2022 the CCR became the Révolution Permanente, the current section of the TF-FI.
 Costa Rica Socialist Revolution League (Liga de la Revolución Socialista) (LRS) - Admitted in 2008 as full section, but they dissolved in 2014.


== See also ==
List of Trotskyist internationals


== References ==


== External links ==

Trotskyist Fraction