Tal Friedman (Hebrew: טל פרידמן; born 20 December 1963) is an Israeli actor, comedian and musician best known for starring on Israeli sketch comedy show Eretz Nehederet.


== Biography ==
Friedman was born in Kiryat Ata, Israel, in 1963. His father was a holocaust survivor.
He served in the Israeli Navy on a missile boat during the 1982 Lebanon War. He studied acting at Tel Aviv University, where he met Moshe Furster, with whom he put on his first act, Alilot Moshe Ba'ir Hagdola (עלילות משה בעיר הגדולה, lit: "Moshe's Adventures in the Big City"). During that time he also performed in several plays. His film appearances include Driks' Brother (1994), Right Back (1997), Riki Riki (2005), Joy (2005) and Schwartz Dynasty (2005). He was also the voice of Sid in the Hebrew dubbing of the Ice Age franchise.
His television career began with the "Tal and Moshe" with Furster, followed by a scheduled time in the program Zehu Ze!, Tzafdina Mearahat ("Tzafdina hosting") and Shaaruria ("Scandal"). In 1999, he began a late night show titled Halomot BeHaKitzis with Eyal Kitzis, and the two moved on to the show Heaven or Hell. In 2004 they both joined the cast of Eretz Nehederet. In 2007, they also cooperated on children's channel Logi.

Friedman is married to Iris and has three children. He lives in Kiryat Tiv'on. In recent years, he has been leading a band named "Tal Friedman and the Krayot". He is an amateur meteorologist.
Tal appeared on The Singer in the Mask as the "Krembo", a type of Israeli marshmallow treat, being the first eliminated.
In 2015, he played for F.C. Haifa Robi Shapira in the Liga Gimel.


== Personal life ==
Friedman is married to Iris and they have three children, two of whom are an adopted son and daughter of Ethiopian origin. His adopted daughter Tamar is autistic. He resides in Kiryat Tivon.
He is known for his love of soccer and support for the Hapoel Haifa soccer team.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tal Friedman on Facebook 
Tal Friedman at IMDb
Tal Friedman at MOOMA (in Hebrew)
Tal Friedman performing at the Israeli sports channel. 29 November 2006.  Event occurs at 445 seconds. Retrieved 4 September 2008.