Rescued by Ruby is a 2022 American biographical drama film directed by Katt Shea. Based on a true story, it follows State Trooper Daniel O'Neil (played by Grant Gustin), who dreams of joining the K-9 search and rescue team. He is unsuccessful in doing so until he adopts and befriends a shelter dog named Ruby. The film was released on March 17, 2022, by Netflix, and received unanimous praise from critics.


== Plot ==
Ruby is an extremely hyperactive half-border collie that has been adopted seven times from the shelter she has been in over the last six months, but always later returned due to an inability to train or control her. Rhode Island state trooper Daniel O'Neil has dreamed of joining the K-9 search and rescue team of the state police. However, he has been rejected seven times and he only has one last chance to qualify before he turns 30, as all applicants have to be under 30.
Daniel learns that the K-9 unit has no funds to import any more German Shepherds, the breed usually used in search and rescue teams, and therefore he would not be able to join the program. He finds out his wife Melissa is pregnant with their second child, making him even more determined to go for it because the promotion would also improve his pay and benefits. Pat, an advocate at the shelter, begs her workmate Rick to give Ruby a little more time. He announces that in the evening they will put her down. Dan discovers a K-9 dog does not have to be a German Shepherd, but is curious, agile, and spirited. Then he visits the shelter, and Pat convinces him to adopt Ruby to train her and join the program. The story then follows Dan's attempts to train Ruby, their failures, and their successes. They both are high-energy, enthusiastic, and have to discover how to work together effectively.
Sergeant Zarella explains that after an entry exam, those accepted do six weeks of intensive training. To enter, the dog and the owner must have the right temperament, focus, calmness, and compassion. Ruby does well until finally, impatient, she wiggles free, disturbing a bee's nest. Out of the official training, Mel reminds Dan he got through the police academy with dyslexia and hyperactivity, so maybe he should try homeschooling Ruby.
At the exam at six weeks, Ruby passes. They wait for months on their junior team, until finally they are needed. Sent to a home where a murder victim is meant to be, Ruby senses human remains, but Dan can't find them. Disappointed, he ignores her, dejected. She runs off during the night, only to have Zarella tell him the remains were found at the scene where Ruby indicated, but buried beneath concrete. Zarella tells Dan it was amazing that Ruby caught the scent, and he should have trusted his K9 partner. Dan frantically searches for Ruby, finally finding her.
Dan and Ruby join the search teams seeking Michael, a boy who got lost while hiking. They find him in the rain and dark, and the boy turns out to be Pat's son. Pat thanks Dan and Ruby and Dan is promoted to full K-9 officer.


== Cast ==
Grant Gustin as Daniel O'Neil
Bear as Ruby
Scott Wolf as Sergeant Matt Zarrella
Kaylah Zander as Melissa O’Neil
Camille Sullivan as Pat Inman
Tom McBeath as Seamus Brady
Sharon Taylor as Sam
Eileen Pedde as Sergeant Amanda Grinnell
Jude Culham-Keays as Michael
Giacomo Baessato as Rick McGuinness


== Production ==
In February 2021, it was announced that Grant Gustin would star in the film.


== Release ==
The film was released on Netflix on March 17, 2022.


== Reception ==
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 100% based on 5 reviews, with an average rating of 6.9/10.
On the week from 21 to 28 of March, the film had 311 million viewing minutes, ranking fourth on Nielsen's top movie chart of that week, and on Netflix's Top 10 English-language films, it placed second.


== References ==


== External links ==
Rescued by Ruby on Netflix 
Rescued by Ruby at IMDb