This is a list of the bird species recorded in the Republic of the Congo. The avifauna of the Republic of the Congo include a total of 733 species.
This list's taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) follow the conventions of The Clements Checklist of Birds of the World, 2022 edition. The family accounts at the beginning of each heading reflect this taxonomy, as do the species counts found in each family account. Introduced and accidental species are included in the total counts for the Republic of the Congo.
The following tags have been used to highlight several categories. The commonly occurring native species do not fall into any of these categories.

(A) Accidental - a species that rarely or accidentally occurs in the Republic of the Congo
(I) Introduced - a species introduced to the Republic of the Congo as a consequence, direct or indirect, of human actions


== Ducks, geese, and waterfowl ==
Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae
Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, flattened bills, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to an oily coating.

White-faced whistling-duck, Dendrocygna viduata
Fulvous whistling-duck, Dendrocygna bicolor
White-backed duck, Thalassornis leuconotus
Knob-billed duck, Sarkidiornis melanotos
Hartlaub's duck, Pteronetta hartlaubii
Egyptian goose, Alopochen aegyptiacus
Spur-winged goose, Plectropterus gambensis
African pygmy-goose, Nettapus auritus
Northern shoveler, Spatula clypeata
African black duck, Anas sparsa (A)
Yellow-billed duck, Anas undulata
Common pochard, Aythya ferina (A)


== Guineafowl ==
Order: Galliformes   Family: Numididae
Guineafowl are a group of African, seed-eating, ground-nesting birds that resemble partridges, but with featherless heads and spangled grey plumage.

Helmeted guineafowl, Numida meleagris
Black guineafowl, Agelastes niger
Plumed guineafowl, Guttera plumifera
Western crested guineafowl, Guttera verreauxi


== Pheasants, grouse, and allies ==
Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae
The Phasianidae are a family of terrestrial birds which consists of quails, snowcocks, francolins, spurfowls, tragopans, monals, pheasants, peafowls and jungle fowls. In general, they are plump (although they vary in size) and have broad, relatively short wings.

Latham's francolin, Peliperdix lathami
Coqui francolin, Campocolinus coqui
White-throated francolin, Campocolinus albogularis
Finsch's francolin, Scleroptila finschi
Blue quail, Synoicus adansonii (A)
Harlequin quail, Coturnix delegorguei
Scaly francolin, Pternistis squamatus
Heuglin's francolin, Pternistis icterorhynchus
Red-necked francolin, Pternistis afer


== Flamingos ==
Order: Phoenicopteriformes   Family: Phoenicopteridae
Flamingos are gregarious wading birds, usually 3 to 5 feet (0.9 to 1.5 m) tall, found in both the Western and Eastern Hemispheres. Flamingos filter-feed on shellfish and algae. Their oddly shaped beaks are specially adapted to separate mud and silt from the food they consume and, uniquely, are used upside-down.

Greater flamingo, Phoenicopterus roseus


== Grebes ==
Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae
Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land.

Little grebe, Tachybaptus ruficollis


== Pigeons and doves ==
Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere.

Rock pigeon, Columba livia (I)
Afep pigeon, Columba unicincta
Bronze-naped pigeon, Columba iriditorques
Lemon dove, Columba larvata (A)
European turtle-dove, Streptopelia turtur (A)
Red-eyed dove, Streptopelia semitorquata
Ring-necked dove, Streptopelia capicola
Laughing dove, Streptopelia senegalensis
Emerald-spotted wood-dove, Turtur chalcospilos
Blue-spotted wood-dove, Turtur afer
Tambourine dove, Turtur tympanistria
Blue-headed wood-dove, Turtur brehmeri
Namaqua dove, Oena capensis
African green-pigeon, Treron calva


== Bustards ==
Order: Otidiformes   Family: Otididae
Bustards are large terrestrial birds mainly associated with dry open country and steppes in the Old World. They are omnivorous and nest on the ground. They walk steadily on strong legs and big toes, pecking for food as they go. They have long broad wings with "fingered" wingtips and striking patterns in flight. Many have interesting mating displays.

Denham's bustard, Neotis denhami
White-bellied bustard, Eupodotis senegalensis
Black-bellied bustard, Lissotis melanogaster


== Turacos ==
Order: Musophagiformes   Family: Musophagidae
The turacos, plantain eaters and go-away-birds make up the bird family Musophagidae. They are medium-sized arboreal birds. The turacos and plantain eaters are brightly coloured, usually in blue, green or purple. The go-away birds are mostly grey and white.

Great blue turaco, Corythaeola cristata
Guinea turaco, Tauraco persa
Black-billed turaco, Tauraco schuettii
Yellow-billed turaco, Tauraco macrorhynchus
Western plantain-eater, Crinifer piscator


== Cuckoos ==
Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. The Old World cuckoos are brood parasites.


== Nightjars and allies ==
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is camouflaged to resemble bark or leaves.

Pennant-winged nightjar, Caprimulgus vexillarius
Standard-winged nightjar, Caprimulgus longipennis (A)
Brown nightjar, Caprimulgus binotatus
Eurasian nightjar, Caprimulgus europaeus (A)
Rufous-cheeked nightjar, Caprimulgus rufigena (A)
Fiery-necked nightjar, Caprimulgus pectoralis
Swamp nightjar, Caprimulgus natalensis
Bates's nightjar, Caprimulgus batesi
Long-tailed nightjar, Caprimulgus climacurus
Square-tailed nightjar, Caprimulgus fossii


== Swifts ==
Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Apodidae
Swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang.

Mottled spinetail, Telacanthura ussheri
Black spinetail, Telacanthura melanopygia
Sabine's spinetail, Rhaphidura sabini
Cassin's spinetail, Neafrapus cassini
Common swift, Apus apus
Nyanza swift, Apus niansae (A)
Pallid swift, Apus pallidus (A)
Little swift, Apus affinis
Horus swift, Apus horus
White-rumped swift, Apus caffer
Bates's swift, Apus batesi
African palm-swift, Cypsiurus parvus


== Flufftails ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Sarothruridae
The flufftails are a small family of ground-dwelling birds found only in Madagascar and sub-Saharan Africa.

White-spotted flufftail, Sarothrura pulchra
Buff-spotted flufftail, Sarothrura elegans
Red-chested flufftail, Sarothrura rufa
Chestnut-headed flufftail, Sarothrura lugens
Streaky-breasted flufftail, Sarothrura boehmi


== Rails, gallinules, and coots ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae
Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. Typically they inhabit dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes which are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers.

African rail, Rallus caerulescens (A)
Corn crake, Crex crex
African crake, Crex egregia
Gray-throated rail, Canirallus oculeus
Lesser moorhen, Paragallinula angulata (A)
Eurasian moorhen, Gallinula chloropus
Allen's gallinule, Porphyrio alleni
African swamphen, Porphyrio madagascariensis
Nkulengu rail, Himantornis haematopus
Striped crake, Amaurornis marginalis (A)
Black crake, Zapornia flavirostris
Little crake, Zapornia parva
Baillon's crake, Zapornia pusilla


== Finfoots ==
Order: Gruiformes   Family: Heliornithidae
Heliornithidae is a small family of tropical birds with webbed lobes on their feet similar to those of grebes and coots.

African finfoot, Podica senegalensis


== Thick-knees ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Burhinidae
The thick-knees are a group of largely tropical waders in the family Burhinidae. They are found worldwide within the tropical zone, with some species also breeding in temperate Europe and Australia. They are medium to large waders with strong black or yellow-black bills, large yellow eyes and cryptic plumage. Despite being classed as waders, most species have a preference for arid or semi-arid habitats.

Water thick-knee, Burhinus vermiculatus


== Egyptian plover ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Pluvianidae
The Egyptian plover is found across equatorial Africa and along the Nile River.

Egyptian plover, Pluvianus aegyptius


== Stilts and avocets ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills.

Black-winged stilt, Himantopus himantopus


== Plovers and lapwings ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae
The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water.

Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola
White-headed lapwing, Vanellus albiceps
Senegal lapwing, Vanellus lugubris
Wattled lapwing, Vanellus senegallus (A)
Brown-chested lapwing, Vanellus superciliosus
Caspian plover, Charadrius asiaticus (A)
Kittlitz's plover, Charadrius pecuarius
Kentish plover, Charadrius alexandrinus
Common ringed plover, Charadrius hiaticula
Little ringed plover, Charadrius dubius (A)
Three-banded plover, Charadrius tricollaris (A)
Forbes's plover, Charadrius forbesi
White-fronted plover, Charadrius marginatus


== Painted-snipes ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Rostratulidae
Painted-snipes are short-legged, long-billed birds similar in shape to the true snipes, but more brightly coloured.

Greater painted-snipe, Rostratula benghalensis (A)


== Jacanas ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Jacanidae
The jacanas are a group of tropical waders in the family Jacanidae. They are found throughout the tropics. They are identifiable by their huge feet and claws which enable them to walk on floating vegetation in the shallow lakes that are their preferred habitat.

African jacana, Actophilornis africanus


== Sandpipers and allies ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae
Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Variation in length of legs and bills enables multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food.


== Buttonquail ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Turnicidae
The buttonquail are small, drab, running birds which resemble the true quails. The female is the brighter of the sexes and initiates courtship. The male incubates the eggs and tends the young.

Small buttonquail, Turnix sylvaticus
Black-rumped buttonquail, Turnix nanus


== Pratincoles and coursers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Glareolidae
Glareolidae is a family of wading birds comprising the pratincoles, which have short legs, long pointed wings and long forked tails, and the coursers, which have long legs, short wings and long, pointed bills which curve downwards.

Temminck's courser, Cursorius temminckii
Bronze-winged courser, Rhinoptilus chalcopterus
Collared pratincole, Glareola pratincola
Black-winged pratincole, Glareola nordmanni (A)
Rock pratincole, Glareola nuchalis
Gray pratincole, Glareola cinerea


== Skuas and jaegers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae
The family Stercorariidae are, in general, medium to large birds, typically with grey or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They nest on the ground in temperate and arctic regions and are long-distance migrants.

Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus (A)
Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus


== Gulls, terns, and skimmers ==
Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae
Laridae is a family of medium to large seabirds, the gulls, terns, and skimmers. They are typically grey or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. Terns are a group of generally medium to large seabirds typically with grey or white plumage, often with black markings on the head. Most terns hunt fish by diving but some pick insects off the surface of fresh water. Terns are generally long-lived birds, with several species known to live in excess of 30 years. Skimmers are a small family of tropical tern-like birds. They have an elongated lower mandible which they use to feed by flying low over the water surface and skimming the water for small fish.


== Penguins ==
Order: Sphenisciformes   Family: Spheniscidae
The penguins are a group of flightless aquatic birds living almost exclusively in the Southern Hemisphere. Most penguins feed on krill, fish, squid, and other forms of marine life caught while swimming underwater.

African penguin, Spheniscus demersus (A)


== Southern storm-petrels ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Oceanitidae
The southern storm-petrels are relatives of the petrels and are the smallest seabirds. They feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. The flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like.

Wilson's storm-petrel, Oceanites oceanicus


== Northern storm-petrels ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae
Though the members of this family are similar in many respects to the southern storm-petrels, including their general appearance and habits, there are enough genetic differences to warrant their placement in a separate family.

Band-rumped storm-petrel, Hydrobates castro (A)


== Shearwaters and petrels ==
Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae
The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterised by united nostrils with medium septum and a long outer functional primary.

Southern giant-petrel, Macronectes giganteus
Sooty shearwater, Ardenna grisea


== Storks ==
Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, long-legged, long-necked, wading birds with long, stout bills. Storks are mute, but bill-clattering is an important mode of communication at the nest. Their nests can be large and may be reused for many years. Many species are migratory.

African openbill, Anastomus lamelligerus
Abdim's stork, Ciconia abdimii
African woolly-necked stork, Ciconia microscelis
White stork, Ciconia ciconia (A)
Saddle-billed stork, Ephippiorhynchus senegalensis
Marabou stork, Leptoptilos crumenifer
Yellow-billed stork, Mycteria ibis


== Boobies and gannets ==
Order: Suliformes   Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium to large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish.

Brown booby, Sula leucogaster
Cape gannet, Morus capensis


== Anhingas ==
Order: Suliformes   Family: Anhingidae
Anhingas or darters are often called "snake-birds" because of their long thin neck, which gives a snake-like appearance when they swim with their bodies submerged. The males have black and dark-brown plumage, an erectile crest on the nape and a larger bill than the female. The females have much paler plumage especially on the neck and underparts. The darters have completely webbed feet and their legs are short and set far back on the body. Their plumage is somewhat permeable, like that of cormorants, and they spread their wings to dry after diving.

African darter, Anhinga rufa


== Cormorants and shags ==
Order: Suliformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae
Phalacrocoracidae is a family of medium to large coastal, fish-eating seabirds that includes cormorants and shags. Plumage colouration varies, with the majority having mainly dark plumage, some species being black-and-white and a few being colourful.

Long-tailed cormorant, Microcarbo africanus
Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo


== Pelicans ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae
Pelicans are large water birds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. As with other members of the order Pelecaniformes, they have webbed feet with four toes.

Great white pelican, Pelecanus onocrotalus
Pink-backed pelican, Pelecanus rufescens


== Hammerkop ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Scopidae
The hammerkop is a medium-sized bird with a long shaggy crest. The shape of its head with a curved bill and crest at the back is reminiscent of a hammer, hence its name. Its plumage is drab-brown all over.

Hamerkop, Scopus umbretta


== Herons, egrets, and bitterns ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the bitterns, herons and egrets. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more wary. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills.


== Ibises and spoonbills ==
Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Threskiornithidae
Threskiornithidae is a family of large terrestrial and wading birds which includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings with 11 primary and about 20 secondary feathers. They are strong fliers and despite their size and weight, very capable soarers.

Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus
African sacred ibis, Threskiornis aethiopicus
Olive ibis, Bostrychia olivacea
Spot-breasted ibis, Bostrychia rara
Hadada ibis, Bostrychia hagedash
African spoonbill, Platalea alba


== Secretarybird ==
Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Sagittariidae
The secretarybird is a bird of prey in the order Accipitriformes but is easily distinguished from other raptors by its long crane-like legs.

Secretarybird, Sagittarius serpentarius


== Osprey ==
Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Pandionidae
The family Pandionidae contains only one species, the osprey. The osprey is a medium-large raptor which is a specialist fish-eater with a worldwide distribution.

Osprey, Pandion haliaetus


== Hawks, eagles, and kites ==
Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Accipitridae
Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey, which includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight.


== Barn-owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae
Barn-owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons.

African grass-owl, Tyto capensis
Barn owl, Tyto alba


== Owls ==
Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae
The typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk.


== Mousebirds ==
Order: Coliiformes   Family: Coliidae
The mousebirds are slender greyish or brown birds with soft, hairlike body feathers and very long thin tails. They are arboreal and scurry through the leaves like rodents in search of berries, fruit and buds. They are acrobatic and can feed upside down. All species have strong claws and reversible outer toes. They also have crests and stubby bills.

Speckled mousebird, Colius striatus


== Trogons ==
Order: Trogoniformes   Family: Trogonidae
The family Trogonidae includes trogons and quetzals. Found in tropical woodlands worldwide, they feed on insects and fruit, and their broad bills and weak legs reflect their diet and arboreal habits. Although their flight is fast, they are reluctant to fly any distance. Trogons have soft, often colourful, feathers with distinctive male and female plumage.

Narina trogon, Apaloderma narina
Bare-cheeked trogon, Apaloderma aequatoriale


== Hoopoes ==
Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Upupidae
Hoopoes have black, white and orangey-pink colouring with a large erectile crest on their head.

Eurasian hoopoe, Upupa epops


== Woodhoopoes and scimitarbills ==
Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Phoeniculidae
The woodhoopoes are related to the kingfishers, rollers and hoopoes. They most resemble the hoopoes with their long curved bills, used to probe for insects, and short rounded wings. However, they differ in that they have metallic plumage, often blue, green or purple, and lack an erectile crest.

White-headed woodhoopoe, Phoeniculus bollei
Forest woodhoopoe, Phoeniculus castaneiceps
Black scimitarbill, Rhinopomastus aterrimus


== Hornbills ==
Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Bucerotidae
Hornbills are a group of birds whose bill is shaped like a cow's horn, but without a twist, sometimes with a casque on the upper mandible. Frequently, the bill is brightly coloured.

Red-billed dwarf hornbill, Lophoceros camurus
African pied hornbill, Lophoceros fasciatus
African gray hornbill, Lophoceros nasutus
White-crested hornbill, Horizocerus albocristatus
Black dwarf hornbill, Horizocerus hartlaubi
Black-casqued hornbill, Ceratogymna atrata
Black-and-white-casqued hornbill, Bycanistes subcylindricus
White-thighed hornbill, Bycanistes albotibialis
Piping hornbill, Bycanistes fistulator


== Kingfishers ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Alcedinidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails. There are 13 species which have been recorded in the Republic of the Congo.

Shining-blue kingfisher, Alcedo quadribrachys
Malachite kingfisher, Corythornis cristatus
White-bellied kingfisher, Corythornis leucogaster
African pygmy kingfisher, Ispidina picta
African dwarf kingfisher, Ispidina lecontei
Chocolate-backed kingfisher, Halcyon badia
Gray-headed kingfisher, Halcyon leucocephala
Woodland kingfisher, Halcyon senegalensis
Blue-breasted kingfisher, Halcyon malimbica
Brown-hooded kingfisher, Halcyon albiventris
Striped kingfisher, Halcyon chelicuti
Giant kingfisher, Megaceryle maximus
Pied kingfisher, Ceryle rudis


== Bee-eaters ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Meropidae
The bee-eaters are a group of near passerine birds in the family Meropidae. Most species are found in Africa but others occur in southern Europe, Madagascar, Australia and New Guinea. They are characterised by richly coloured plumage, slender bodies and usually elongated central tail feathers. All are colourful and have long downturned bills and pointed wings, which give them a swallow-like appearance when seen from afar.

Black bee-eater, Merops gularis
Blue-headed bee-eater, Merops muelleri
White-fronted bee-eater, Merops bullockoides
Little bee-eater, Merops pusillus
Blue-breasted bee-eater, Merops variegatus
Black-headed bee-eater, Merops breweri
White-throated bee-eater, Merops albicollis
Blue-cheeked bee-eater, Merops persicus
European bee-eater, Merops apiaster
Rosy bee-eater, Merops malimbicus


== Rollers ==
Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Coraciidae
Rollers resemble crows in size and build, but are more closely related to the kingfishers and bee-eaters. They share the colourful appearance of those groups with blues and browns predominating. The two inner front toes are connected, but the outer toe is not.

European roller, Coracias garrulus
Lilac-breasted roller, Coracias caudata
Broad-billed roller, Eurystomus glaucurus
Blue-throated roller, Eurystomus gularis


== African barbets ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Lybiidae
The African barbets are plump birds, with short necks and large heads. They get their name from the bristles which fringe their heavy bills. Most species are brightly coloured.


== Honeyguides ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Indicatoridae
Honeyguides are among the few birds that feed on wax. They are named for the greater honeyguide which leads traditional honey-hunters to bees' nests and, after the hunters have harvested the honey, feeds on the remaining contents of the hive.

Cassin's honeyguide, Prodotiscus insignis
Zenker's honeyguide, Melignomon zenkeri
Willcock's honeyguide, Indicator willcocksi
Least honeyguide, Indicator exilis
Lesser honeyguide, Indicator minor
Spotted honeyguide, Indicator maculatus
Greater honeyguide, Indicator indicator
Lyre-tailed honeyguide, Melichneutes robustus


== Woodpeckers ==
Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae
Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks.

Rufous-necked wryneck, Jynx ruficollis
African piculet, Verreauxia africana
Gabon woodpecker, Chloropicus gabonensis
Elliot's woodpecker, Chloropicus elliotii
Speckle-breasted woodpecker, Chloropicus poecilolaemus
Cardinal woodpecker, Chloropicus fuscescens
Golden-crowned woodpecker, Chloropicus xantholophus
African gray woodpecker, Chloropicus goertae
Brown-eared woodpecker, Campethera caroli
Buff-spotted woodpecker, Campethera nivosa
Green-backed woodpecker, Campethera cailliautii
Golden-tailed woodpecker, Campethera abingoni


== Falcons and caracaras ==
Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons.

Lesser kestrel, Falco naumanni
Eurasian kestrel, Falco tinnunculus
Rock kestrel, Falco rupicolus
Gray kestrel, Falco ardosiaceus
Red-footed falcon, Falco vespertinus
Eleonora's falcon, Falco eleonorae
Eurasian hobby, Falco subbuteo (A)
African hobby, Falco cuvierii
Lanner falcon, Falco biarmicus (A)
Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus


== Old World parrots ==
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittaculidae
Characteristic features of parrots include a strong curved bill, an upright stance, strong legs, and clawed zygodactyl feet. Many parrots are vividly colored, and some are multi-colored. In size they range from 8 cm (3.1 in) to 1 m (3.3 ft) in length. Old World parrots are found from Africa east across south and southeast Asia and Oceania to Australia and New Zealand.

Black-collared lovebird, Agapornis swinderniana
Red-headed lovebird, Agapornis pullarius


== African and New World parrots ==
Order: Psittaciformes   Family: Psittacidae
African and New World parrots are small to large birds with a characteristic curved beak. Their upper mandibles have slight mobility in the joint with the skull and they have a generally erect stance. All parrots are zygodactyl, having the four toes on each foot placed two at the front and two to the back. Most of the more than 150 species in this family are found in the New World.

Gray parrot, Psittacus erithacus
Red-fronted parrot, Poicephalus gulielmi


== African and green broadbills ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calyptomenidae
The broadbills are small, brightly coloured birds, which feed on fruit and also take insects in flycatcher fashion, snapping their broad bills. Their habitat is canopies of wet forests.

African broadbill, Smithornis capensis
Gray-headed broadbill, Smithornis sharpei
Rufous-sided broadbill, Smithornis rufolateralis


== Pittas ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pittidae
Pittas are medium-sized by passerine standards and are stocky, with fairly long, strong legs, short tails and stout bills. Many are brightly coloured. They spend the majority of their time on wet forest floors, eating snails, insects and similar invertebrates.

African pitta, Pitta angolensis
Green-breasted pitta, Pitta reichenowi


== Cuckooshrikes ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Campephagidae
The cuckooshrikes are small to medium-sized passerine birds. They are predominantly greyish with white and black, although some species are brightly coloured.

Oriole cuckooshrike, Lobotos oriolinus
Petit's cuckooshrike, Campephaga petiti
Red-shouldered cuckooshrike, Campephaga phoenicea
Purple-throated cuckooshrike, Campephaga quiscalina
Blue cuckooshrike, Cyanograucalus azureus


== Old World orioles ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Oriolidae
The Old World orioles are colourful passerine birds. They are not related to the New World orioles.

Eurasian golden oriole, Oriolus oriolus (A)
African golden oriole, Oriolus auratus
Western black-headed oriole, Oriolus brachyrhynchus
Black-winged oriole, Oriolus nigripennis


== Wattle-eyes and batises ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Platysteiridae
The wattle-eyes, or puffback flycatchers, are small stout passerine birds of the African tropics. They get their name from the brightly coloured fleshy eye decorations found in most species in this group.

Brown-throated wattle-eye, Platysteira cyanea
Chestnut wattle-eye, Platysteira castanea
White-spotted wattle-eye, Platysteira tonsa
Yellow-bellied wattle-eye, Platysteira concreta
Chinspot batis, Batis molitor
Western black-headed batis, Batis erlangeri
Verreaux's batis, Batis minima
West African batis, Batis occulta
Angola batis, Batis minulla


== Vangas, helmetshrikes, and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Vangidae
The helmetshrikes are similar in build to the shrikes, but tend to be colourful species with distinctive crests or other head ornaments, such as wattles, from which they get their name.

Rufous-bellied helmetshrike, Prionops rufiventris
African shrike-flycatcher, Megabyas flammulatus
Black-and-white shrike-flycatcher, Bias musicus


== Bushshrikes and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Malaconotidae
Bushshrikes are similar in habits to shrikes, hunting insects and other small prey from a perch on a bush. Although similar in build to the shrikes, these tend to be either colourful species or largely black; some species are quite secretive.


== Drongos ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Dicruridae
The drongos are mostly black or dark grey in colour, sometimes with metallic tints. They have long forked tails, and some Asian species have elaborate tail decorations. They have short legs and sit very upright when perched, like a shrike. They flycatch or take prey from the ground.

Sharpe's drongo, Dicrurus sharpei
Common square-tailed drongo, Dicrurus ludwigii
Shining drongo, Dicrurus atripennis
Fork-tailed drongo, Dicrurus adsimilis
Glossy-backed drongo, Dicrurus divaricatus
Velvet-mantled drongo, Dicrurus modestus


== Monarch flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Monarchidae
The monarch flycatchers are small to medium-sized insectivorous passerines which hunt by flycatching.

Blue-headed crested-flycatcher, Trochocercus nitens
Black-headed paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone rufiventer
Rufous-vented paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone rufocinerea
Bates's paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone batesi
African paradise-flycatcher, Terpsiphone viridis


== Shrikes ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey.

Red-backed shrike, Lanius collurio (A)
Red-tailed shrike, Lanius phoenicuroides (A)
Isabelline shrike, Lanius isabellinus (A)
Lesser gray shrike, Lanius minor
Mackinnon's shrike, Lanius mackinnoni
Northern fiscal, Lanius humeralis
Souza's shrike, Lanius souzae


== Crows, jays, and magpies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae
The family Corvidae includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers, and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence.

Pied crow, Corvus albus


== Rockfowl ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Picathartidae
Rockfowl are lanky birds with crow-like bills, long necks, tails and legs, and strong feet adapted to terrestrial feeding. They are similar in size and structure to the completely unrelated roadrunners, but they hop rather than walk. They also have brightly coloured unfeathered heads.

Gray-necked rockfowl, Picathartes oreas (A)


== Hyliotas ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hyliotidae
The members of this small family, all of genus Hyliota, are birds of the forest canopy. They tend to feed in mixed-species flocks.

Yellow-bellied hyliota, Hyliota flavigaster
Violet-backed hyliota, Hyliota violacea


== Fairy flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Stenostiridae
Most of the species of this small family are found in Africa, though a few inhabit tropical Asia. They are not closely related to other birds called "flycatchers".

African blue flycatcher, Elminia longicauda
Dusky crested-flycatcher, Elminia nigromitrata


== Tits, chickadees, and titmice ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae
The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet including seeds and insects.

White-shouldered black-tit, Melaniparus guineensis
White-winged black-tit, Melaniparus leucomelas
Rufous-bellied tit, Melaniparus rufiventris
Dusky tit, Melaniparus funereus


== Penduline-tits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Remizidae
The penduline-tits are a group of small passerine birds related to the true tits. They are insectivores.

Forest penduline-tit, Anthoscopus flavifrons
African penduline-tit, Anthoscopus caroli


== Larks ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds.

Rufous-naped lark, Mirafra africana
Flappet lark, Mirafra rufocinnamomea
Red-capped lark, Calandrella cinerea


== Nicators ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Nicatoridae
The nicators are shrike-like, with hooked bills. They are endemic to sub-Saharan Africa.

Western nicator, Nicator chloris
Yellow-throated nicator, Nicator vireo


== African warblers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Macrosphenidae
African warblers are small to medium-sized insectivores which are found in a wide variety of habitats south of the Sahara.

Green crombec, Sylvietta virens
Lemon-bellied crombec, Sylvietta denti
Red-capped crombec, Sylvietta ruficapilla
Moustached grass-warbler, Melocichla mentalis
Yellow longbill, Macrosphenus flavicans
Gray longbill, Macrosphenus concolor
Grauer's warbler, Graueria vittata
Green hylia, Hylia prasina
Tit-hylia, Pholidornis rushiae


== Cisticolas and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cisticolidae
The Cisticolidae are warblers found mainly in warmer southern regions of the Old World. They are generally very small birds of drab brown or grey appearance found in open country such as grassland or scrub.


== Reed warblers and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Acrocephalidae
The members of this family are usually rather large for "warblers". Most are rather plain olivaceous brown above with much yellow to beige below. They are usually found in open woodland, reedbeds, or tall grass. The family occurs mostly in southern to western Eurasia and surroundings, but it also ranges far into the Pacific, with some species in Africa.

African yellow-warbler, Iduna natalensis
Icterine warbler, Hippolais icterina
Sedge warbler, Acrocephalus schoenobaenus
Common reed warbler, Acrocephalus scirpaceus
Greater swamp warbler, Acrocephalus rufescens
Great reed warbler, Acrocephalus arundinaceus


== Grassbirds and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Locustellidae
Locustellidae are a family of small insectivorous songbirds found mainly in Eurasia, Africa, and the Australian region. They are smallish birds with tails that are usually long and pointed, and tend to be drab brownish or buffy all over.

Fan-tailed grassbird, Catriscus brevirostris
Little rush warbler, Bradypterus baboecala
Highland rush warbler, Bradypterus centralis


== Swallows ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae
The family Hirundinidae is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partially joined at the base.


== Bulbuls ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pycnonotidae
Bulbuls are medium-sized songbirds. Some are colourful with yellow, red or orange vents, cheeks, throats or supercilia, but most are drab, with uniform olive-brown to black plumage. Some species have distinct crests.


== Leaf warblers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Phylloscopidae
Leaf warblers are a family of small insectivorous birds found mostly in Eurasia and ranging into Wallacea and Africa. The species are of various sizes, often green-plumaged above and yellow below, or more subdued with grayish-green to grayish-brown colors.

Wood warbler, Phylloscopus sibilatrix
Willow warbler, Phylloscopus trochilus
Uganda woodland-warbler, Phylloscopus budongoensis


== Bush warblers and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Scotocercidae
The members of this family are found throughout Africa, Asia, and Polynesia. Their taxonomy is in flux, and some authorities place genus Erythrocerus in another family.

Chestnut-capped flycatcher, Erythrocercus mccallii


== Sylviid warblers, parrotbills, and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sylviidae
The family Sylviidae is a group of small insectivorous passerine birds. They mainly occur as breeding species, as the common name implies, in Europe, Asia and, to a lesser extent, Africa. Most are of generally undistinguished appearance, but many have distinctive songs.

Garden warbler, Sylvia borin
Greater whitethroat, Curruca communis


== White-eyes, yuhinas, and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Zosteropidae
The white-eyes are small and mostly undistinguished, their plumage above being generally some dull colour like greenish-olive, but some species have a white or bright yellow throat, breast or lower parts, and several have buff flanks. As their name suggests, many species have a white ring around each eye.

Forest white-eye, Zosterops stenocricotus (A)
Green white-eye, Zosterops stuhlmanni
Northern yellow white-eye, Zosterops senegalensis
Southern yellow white-eye, Zosterops anderssoni


== Ground babblers and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Pellorneidae
These small to medium-sized songbirds have soft fluffy plumage but are otherwise rather diverse. Members of the genus Illadopsis are found in forests, but some other genera are birds of scrublands.

Brown illadopsis, Illadopsis fulvescens
Pale-breasted illadopsis, Illadopsis rufipennis
Blackcap illadopsis, Illadopsis cleaveri


== Laughingthrushes and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Leiothrichidae
The members of this family are diverse in size and coloration, though those of genus Turdoides tend to be brown or grayish. The family is found in Africa, India, and southeast Asia.

Arrow-marked babbler, Turdoides jardineii


== Oxpeckers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Buphagidae
As both the English and scientific names of these birds imply, they feed on ectoparasites, primarily ticks, found on large mammals.

Yellow-billed oxpecker, Buphagus africanus


== Starlings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small to medium-sized passerine birds. Their flight is strong and direct and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country. They eat insects and fruit. Plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen.

Wattled starling, Creatophora cinerea (A)
Violet-backed starling, Cinnyricinclus leucogaster
Chestnut-winged starling, Onychognathus fulgidus
White-collared starling, Grafisia torquata (A)
Narrow-tailed starling, Poeoptera lugubris
Purple-headed starling, Hylopsar purpureiceps
Splendid starling, Lamprotornis splendidus
Cape starling, Lamprotornis nitens (A)


== Thrushes and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs.

Rufous flycatcher-thrush, Neocossyphus fraseri
Red-tailed ant-thrush, Neocossyphus rufus
White-tailed ant-thrush, Neocossyphus poensis
Crossley's ground-thrush, Geokichla crossleyi
African thrush, Turdus pelios


== Old World flycatchers ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae
Old World flycatchers are a large group of small passerine birds native to the Old World. They are mainly small arboreal insectivores. The appearance of these birds is highly varied, but they mostly have weak songs and harsh calls.


== Sunbirds and spiderhunters ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Nectariniidae
The sunbirds and spiderhunters are very small passerine birds which feed largely on nectar, although they will also take insects, especially when feeding young. Flight is fast and direct on their short wings. Most species can take nectar by hovering like a hummingbird, but usually perch to feed.


== Weavers and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Ploceidae
The weavers are small passerine birds related to the finches. They are seed-eating birds with rounded conical bills. The males of many species are brightly coloured, usually in red or yellow and black, some species show variation in colour only in the breeding season.


== Waxbills and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Estrildidae
The estrildid finches are small passerine birds of the Old World tropics and Australasia. They are gregarious and often colonial seed eaters with short thick but pointed bills. They are all similar in structure and habits, but have wide variation in plumage colours and patterns.


== Indigobirds ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Viduidae
The indigobirds are finch-like species which usually have black or indigo predominating in their plumage. All are brood parasites, which lay their eggs in the nests of estrildid finches.

Pin-tailed whydah, Vidua macroura
Wilson's indigobird, Vidua wilsoni
Cameroon indigobird, Vidua camerunensis
Variable indigobird, Vidua funerea
Parasitic weaver, Anomalospiza imberbis


== Old World sparrows ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae
Old World sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small, plump, brown or grey birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects.

House sparrow, Passer domesticus (A)
Northern gray-headed sparrow, Passer griseus
Yellow-throated bush sparrow, Gymnoris superciliaris


== Wagtails and pipits ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae
Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country.

Mountain wagtail, Motacilla clara
Western yellow wagtail, Motacilla flava
African pied wagtail, Motacilla aguimp
White wagtail, Motacilla alba
Richard's pipit, Anthus richardi
African pipit, Anthus cinnamomeus
Woodland pipit, Anthus nyassae
Long-billed pipit, Anthus similis (A)
Plain-backed pipit, Anthus leucophrys
Long-legged pipit, Anthus pallidiventris
Tree pipit, Anthus trivialis (A)
Red-throated pipit, Anthus cervinus (A)
Short-tailed pipit, Anthus brachyurus
Yellow-throated longclaw, Macronyx croceus


== Finches, euphonias, and allies ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae
Finches are seed-eating passerine birds, that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well.

Yellow-fronted canary, Crithagra mozambicus
Black-faced canary, Crithagra capistratus
Black-throated canary, Crithagra atrogularis


== Old World buntings ==
Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae
The emberizids are a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns.

Brown-rumped bunting, Emberiza affinis
Cabanis's bunting, Emberiza cabanisi
Golden-breasted bunting, Emberiza flaviventris
Lark-like bunting, Emberiza impetuani
Cinnamon-breasted bunting, Emberiza tahapisi


== See also ==
List of birds
Lists of birds by region
List of mammals of the Republic of the Congo


== References ==

Lepage, Denis. "Checklist of Birds of the Republic of the Congo". Bird Checklists of the World. Avibase. Retrieved 27 April 2020.
Clements, James F. (2000). Birds of the World: A Checklist. Cornell University Press. p. 880. ISBN 0-934797-16-1.