Jeshoreshwari Kali Temple (Bengali: যশোরেশ্বরী কালী মন্দির) is a famous Hindu temple in Bangladesh, dedicated to the goddess Kali. The temple is located in Ishwaripur, a village in Shyamnagar upazila of Satkhira. The name "Jeshoreshwari" means "Goddess of Jeshore". The Prime Minister of India Shri Narendra Modi visited this temple in 2021.


== Legend ==
Jeshoreshwari is regarded as one of the 51 Peeth of Sati; according to the belief, it is where the various parts of Sati's body are said to have fallen. Jeshoreshwari represents the site where the palm of Sati fell. Legend says that the General of Maharaja Pratapaditya discovered a luminant ray of light coming from the bushes, and came upon a piece of stone carved in the form of a human palm. Later, Pratapaditya started worshiping Kali, building the Jeshoreshwari Kali Temple. As to be the "Goddess of Jessore", it was named after Jessore.


== The Jeshoreshwari Shrine as a Shakti Peeth ==
Palms of hands and soles of the feet

The mythology of Daksha yaga and Sati's self-immolation is the story behind the origin of Shakti Peethas. Shakti Peethas divine places or holy abode of the Mother Goddess(Parashakti). These shrines are believed to be sanctified with the presence of Shakti due to the falling of body parts of the corpse of Sati Devi, when Lord Shiva carried it and wandered throughout Aryavartha in sorrow. There are 51 Shakti Peeth located all around South Asia. Each temple have shrines for Shakti and  Kalabhairava, The Shakti of this shrine is addressed as Jeshoreshwari and Bhairava as Chanda.


== History ==

It is believed to have created by a brahman named Anari. He created a 100-door temple for the Jeshoreshwari Peeth. But the timeline is not to be known. Later it has been renovated by Lakshman Sen and Pratapaditya in their reigning periods.
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited the Jeshoreshwari Kali Temple in Shyamnagar upazila of Satkhira on 27 March  2021 and offered prayers. He gifted a crown for the Goddess which was stolen in October 2024.


== Worship and rituals ==
The temple is visited by pilgrims from all over, irrespective of sectarian differences. Worship is done by the priest every Saturday and Tuesday at noon time. But before 1971, there was a daily routine of worship. Every year on the day of Kali puja, the present Caretakers of the temple conduct a ceremony. There is also a Mela taking place around the temple compound.


== 'Natmondir' and architecture ==
A large rectangular covered platform called Natmondir has been erected adjacent to the main temple, from where the face of the goddess can be seen. This was renovated by Laxman Sen in the late 13th century, but the builders are not known. After 1971, it crumbled. Now only the pillars can be seen.


== References ==


== External links ==

Jeshore Khulnar Itihash by Satish Chandra Mitra, pp. 87, 100, 551.
Baghrotot Parikraman: Satkhira Zillar Itihash O Oitijhyo by Jyoti Chattopadhyay, p. 105.
Sunderban-er Itihash by AFM Abdul Jalil