Khushboo (transl. Aroma) is a 1975 Hindi-language drama film, produced by Prasan Kapoor under the Tirupati Pictures banner, presented by Jeetendra and directed by Gulzar. It stars Jeetendra, Hema Malini and music composed by R. D. Burman. The film is based on the Bengali novel Panditmashai, by Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay, which was earlier filmed in Bengali in 1951 by Naresh Mitra.


== Plot ==
Kusum, as a child, marries Vrindavan. After some time, her father dies in a riot, and blame erroneously comes to Vrindavan's father. Due to this, Vrindavan's father rejects Kusum to be his daughter-in-law. Kusum, along with her brother and mother, moves to a different village away from Vrindavan's family. Now they grow up, and Kusum considers herself as the wife of Vrindavan and refuses to marry anyone else. Eventually, her mother dies, and her brother Kunj stays single as he doesn't want to marry until he sends his sister to her in-laws. On the other side, Vrindavan's father dies, and he becomes a doctor. Oblivious to Kusum's feelings, he goes on to marry another girl, Lakhi, who was also a victim of child marriage and has no one now. They have a son, Charan, and Lakhi dies after some time due to illness. He moves to his village and starts a practice there. Once, he happens to visit a wealthy patient in Kusum's village where Kusum recognizes him, though he fails to as he only knows her pet name, not real name, gradually, they come closer, and Vrindavan's mother is happy to accept Kusum as her daughter-in-law. But misunderstandings develop because Kusum considers them insensitive as they not only forgot what they had done to her family but also take her for granted now. But Vrindavan, having a soft corner for her, still wishes that she would come to him. Kusum grows close to his son Charan and keeps him with her during the endemic in Vrindavan's village. Finally, Vrindavan and Kusum can overcome egoistic barriers and unite with the blessings of her brother, Vrindavan's mother, and little Charan.


== Cast ==
Jeetendra as Dr. Brindaban
Hema Malini as Kusum
Sharmila Tagore as Lakhi
Asrani as Kunj
Om Shivpuri as Brindaban's father
Chandrima Bhaduri as Chaudhrain
Dev Kishan as Munim
Sudhir Thakkar as Sudhir
Durga Khote as Brindaban's mother
Farida Jalal as Manno
Sarika as Kali
Leela Mishra as Kusum's mother
Master Raju as Charan (Brindaban's son)


== Soundtrack ==
The music of the film was by R. D. Burman, and the lyrics were by Gulzar. The song "O Majhi Re Apna Kinara" went on to be used in the Malaysian film Rabun.


== References ==


== External links ==
Kushboo at IMDb