Confess, Fletch is a 2022 American crime comedy film directed by Greg Mottola, who co-wrote the screenplay with Zev Borow. Based on Gregory Mcdonald's 1976 novel of the same name, it stars Jon Hamm, Roy Wood Jr., Annie Mumolo, Ayden Mayeri, Lorenza Izzo, Kyle MacLachlan, and Marcia Gay Harden. It is the third installment in the Fletch series, following Fletch (1985) and Fletch Lives (1989), and the first not to star Chevy Chase.
Confess, Fletch was released in the United States in select theaters and on premium video on demand on September 16, 2022, before a Showtime premiere on October 28, 2022. It received generally positive reviews.


== Plot ==
Irwin Maurice “Fletch” Fletcher used to work as a crime reporter and investigative journalist and is now a freelance writer. He is hired by a billionaire Italian count to investigate the whereabouts of his missing art collection. Fletch soon has a first lead; Boston art dealer Ronald Horan has sold two of the paintings. In Rome, Fletch meets Angela, the attractive daughter of his client, and a love affair develops between the two. Angela then receives news from the police that her father has apparently been kidnapped by organized criminals who are demanding a Picasso from the missing collection as ransom.
As Fletch arrives in a short-term rented townhouse in Boston, he finds a dead woman, subsequently identified as barista Laurel Goodwin. Despite being the one who called the police, Fletch becomes the prime suspect in the murder. Sergeant Inspector Monroe and Junior Detective Griz of the Boston Police Department begin tailing him.
Fletch meets with Horan under a fake name in an attempt to locate the paintings. He learns from his neighbor Eve that Owen, the townhouse owner, has a history of violence and drug abuse and an estranged spouse named Tatiana, who used to be his business partner. Fletch meets with Tatiana, again using a fake name, and suspects that she is the killer.
Meanwhile, the Countess, Angela's stepmother, invites herself to stay with Fletch. Angela is not happy with this development, as she suspects that the Countess and her brother kidnapped the Count. Angela arrives in Boston and initially appears to be friendly with the Countess.
At dinner that night, Fletch, the Countess, and Angela are visited by Owen, Tatiana, and Eve. Laurel's boyfriend arrives inebriated and tries to kill Fletch. When the boyfriend is distracted by Eve's dog, Fletch snatches his gun and learns that Angela knows and was in contact with Owen. She abruptly leaves in the middle of the evening.
Fletch follows Angela to a meeting with Horan on his sailboat, assuming that she stole the paintings and transferred them to Horan to sell. Horan reveals that he killed Laurel and framed Fletch to thwart his investigation. He then planned to deceive Angela and pay off his debts by selling the Count's art collection. Horan pulls a gun and tries to kill Fletch, but is shot dead by Griz.
The Count, who faked his kidnapping with Fletch's help as a test of his wife and daughter's love, returns and persuades Fletch to keep the paintings. From an undisclosed location in Central America, Fletch sends paintings to the Countess, Eve, his previous boss, and two street artists, and a large check to Laurel's boyfriend and her family.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
Following the release of Fletch (1985) and Fletch Lives (1989) starring Chevy Chase, attempts to reboot the series based on the Gregory Mcdonald novels frequently became mired in development hell. Names such as Kevin Smith and Jason Lee, Bill Lawrence and Zach Braff, and Jason Sudeikis were previously attached to the property.
In July 2020, it was reported that Jon Hamm would star in and produce an adaptation of the Mcdonald novel Confess, Fletch directed by Greg Mottola. In June 2021, Marcia Gay Harden, Kyle MacLachlan, Roy Wood Jr., and John Slattery joined the cast. The following month, Ayden Mayeri, Lorenza Izzo, and Annie Mumolo were added to the cast.
Principal photography began in Boston on June 28, 2021. In early July, scenes were filmed in Worcester, Massachusetts, outside the local police department. Since the film had a 27-day shooting schedule, Hamm and Mottola returned a portion of their salaries in order to secure an additional three days of filming.


== Reception ==
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 86% of 129 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.6/10. The website's consensus reads: "Shorter on wacky hijinks but still very funny, Confess, Fletch is a showcase for Jon Hamm's comedic chops that revives this long-dormant franchise with style." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 64 out of 100, based on 32 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.


== Cancelled sequel ==
Shortly after the film's release, Mottola said he had been hired to write a sequel based on the 1978 novel Fletch's Fortune, but said he was "not sure" if it would be produced. In August 2024, Mottola said that the sequel was no longer in development, with the director attributing the setback to a change of leadership at Miramax and the film underperforming at the box office.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website at Miramax
Confess, Fletch at IMDb