Venus Centre (Arabic: مركز الزُّهرة) is a Syrian dubbing studio. Venus Centre specializes in dubbing animation and children's programs to the Arabic language, especially Japanese anime. The company is based in Damascus.


== History ==
Venus Centre was founded in 1985.


== Series ==
The Pink Panther (Young Future)
Dragon Booster (Eastern Vision S.A.)
Little Bear (Eastern Vision S.A.)
The Bots Master
Foofur (Young Future Entertainment)
Anatole (Eastern Vision S.A.)
Casper and the Angels (Young Future)
The Spooktacular New Adventures of Casper (Young Future Entertainment)
Casper's Scare School (Young Future Entertainment)
The Scooby-Doo Show (Young Future Entertainment)
Scooby-Doo! in Arabian Nights (Young Future Entertainment)
What's New, Scooby-Doo? (first dub) (Young Future Entertainment)
Tiny Toon Adventures
Baby Looney Tunes
The Road Runner Show (Young Future Entertainment)
Taz-Mania (Young Future Entertainment)
ALF: The Animated Series
Franklin (Eastern Vision S.A.)
The All-New Popeye Hour (Season 1: Tele-Pictures Promoters International Season 2: Eastern Vision S.A.)
Popeye & Son (Eastern Vision S.A.)
Rupert (Eastern Vision S.A.)
The Flintstones (Young Future Entertainment)
The Jetsons
Bruno the Kid (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Fabulous Funnies (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Police Academy (Young Future Entertainment)
Hurricanes (Young Future Entertainment)
Camp Candy (Young Future Entertainment)
Make Way for Noddy (Young Future Entertainment)
The Mask (Young Future)
Batman: The Animated Series (first dub) (Young Future Entertainment)
Krypto the Superdog (Cartoon Star)
Street Sharks (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Happy Ness: Secret of the Loch (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Captain Simian & the Space Monkeys (Young Future Entertainment)
Stone Protectors (Young Future Entertainment)
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles (1987) (Tele Pictures Promotera International) (replacing Fimali Productions Sarl)
¡Mucha Lucha! (first dub)
Animaniacs (Young Future Entertainment)
Pinky and the Brain (Young Future Entertainment)
Street Fighter (Young Future)
Mortal Kombat: Defenders of the Realm (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
ProStars (Young Future Entertainment)
Super Mario World (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
The Secret Lives of Waldo Kitty (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Sonic the Hedgehog (Young Future Entertainment)
The Wacky World of Tex Avery (Cartoon Star)
The Twisted Tales of Felix the Cat (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Birdz (Eastern Vision S.A.)
Pound Puppies (Young Future)
Ultraforce (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Sheep in the Big City (Young Future Entertainment)
The Adventures of Sam & Max: Freelance Police (Eastern Vision S.A.)
All-New Dennis the Menace (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Double Dragon (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Rescue Heroes (Eastern Vision S.A.)
Bump in the Night (Young Futute Entertainment)
Exosquad (Young Future Entertainment)
Dumb and Dumber
Beast Wars: Transformers
Beast Machines: Transformers
What-a-Mess (Cartoon Star) (DiC Version only)
Action Man
Tom & Jerry Kids (Young Future)
Woody Woodpecker (Young Future)
Where on Earth Is Carmen Sandiego? (Cartoon Star)
Fifi and the Flowertots (first dub) (Cartoon Star)
Dexter's Laboratory (Young Future Entertainment)
Adventures from the Book of Virtues (Cartoon Star)
Peanuts (Young Future)
Madeline
Wild West C.O.W.-Boys of Moo Mesa (Young Future Entertainment)
SWAT Kats: The Radical Squadron (Young Future)
Cabbage Patch Kids
Sealab 2021 (Young Future Entertainment)
Super Duper Sumos (Cartoon Star)
Codename: Kids Next Door (Young Future)
Iron Kid (Cartoon Star)
The Toy Warrior (Cartoon Star)
Watership Down (Al Sayyar Art Prod.)
Wolverine and the X-Men
The Magic School Bus (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Phantom 2040 (Tele-Pictures Promoters International)
Ben 10 (Young Future)
Strawberry Shortcake (Cartoon Star)
Inspector Gadget's Field Trip (Young Future Entertainment)


== See also ==
Spacetoon
Animation International


== References ==

مركز الزهرة للإنتاج الفني Zarfin


== External links ==
Venus Centre  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Notes
^  KM Production dubs anime but from the English dub.