From the Screen to Your Stereo Part II is a cover album by American band New Found Glory, and is the follow-up from the EP From the Screen to Your Stereo (2000). All the tracks are cover versions of songs from motion picture soundtracks. In 2019, the band released another album in the series, From the Screen to Your Stereo 3, under the Hopeless label.


== Release and music video for "Kiss Me" ==
From late June to late August, the band went on the Warped Tour, and played at the Reading and Leeds Festivals in the United Kingdom. On August 10, 2007, a cover of the Goo Goo Dolls song "Iris" was posted on the group's Myspace account. On August 17, 2007, a cover of the Sixpence None the Richer song "Kiss Me" was also posted on their Myspace. On August 24, a cover of the Tears for Fears song "Head over Heels" was made available for streaming via Alternative Press. Five days later, a cover of the Madonna song "Crazy for You" was posted online. The music video for "Kiss Me" was posted online on September 5, 2007; a cover of the Go West song "King of Wishful Thinking" premiered through AbsolutePunk four days later.
From the Screen to Your Stereo Part II was made available for streaming through their Myspace on September 14, 2007, and was released through Drive-Thru Records four days later. On the same day, "Kiss Me" was released to radio. In October and November, the band went on a co-headlining tour of the U.S. with Senses Fail. They were supported by Set Your Goals and The Receiving End of Sirens. The band joined Paramore on their tour of the UK in January and February 2008.


=== Music video for "Kiss Me" ===
The music video for New Found Glory's cover version of "Kiss Me" premiered on September 5, 2007 and revolves around a large group of teenagers who construct a tree house out of mattresses, and throw a raucous garden party involving pillow fights and kissing, while the members of the band, along with the members of Paramore, perform the song around them. While the bands perform, a young man, played by drummer Chase Dodds of the band Classic Addict, sets off on a mission to kiss as many girls as possible during the party, keeping a tally on his inner left forearm in black pen. After narrowly avoiding kissing a man (whom he mistakes for a girl because of his long hair), Chase attempts to kiss Paramore's lead singer, Hayley Williams, only to have her recognize the tally on his arm, and slap him in the face, knocking him to the ground. He is then set upon by all the girls he has kissed at the party, who then proceed to strip him of his shirt and tie him to a nearby tree with duct tape. One of the girls tapes his mouth shut, before writing "kiss me" on his chest in black ink. The girls then rejoin the party, leaving Chase tied to the tree.


== Track listing ==


== Release history ==


== Credits ==
Band
Jordan Pundik – Vocals
Chad Gilbert – Guitar
Steve Klein – Guitar
Ian Grushka – Bass
Cyrus Bolooki – Drums / Percussion
Additional Musicians
Michael Bethancourt – Keyboards
Guest Appearances
Max Bemis – Vocals ("Crazy for You")
Adam Lazzara – Vocals ("Lovefool")
Lisa Loeb – Vocals ("Stay")
Chris Carrabba – Vocals ("The Promise")
Patrick Stump – Vocals ("The King of Wishful Thinking")
Will Pugh – Vocals ("Iris")
Sherri DuPree – Vocals ("It Ain't Me Babe")
Stacy DuPree – Vocals ("Lovefool")
Production
Paul Miner – Engineer, Audio Mixing
Ted Jensen – Mastering
Richard Reines – Executive Producer, A&R
Stefanie Reines – Executive Producer, A&R
Kristine Ripley – Project Coordinator, A&R
Kelly Scott Orr – Art Direction, Design, Graphic Design
Boyd Dupree – Photography


== References ==


== External links ==
From the Screen to Your Stereo Part II at YouTube (streamed copy where licensed)