Om Parvat is a mountain located  in Pithoragarh district, Uttarakhand, India. Om Parvat's peak elevation is 5,590 m (18,340 ft) above sea level.


== The Meaning of Om Parvat ==
Om Parvat derives its name from the Sanskrit word Om, which is composed of three sounds: A, U, and M. These sounds represent the three states of consciousness: waking, dreaming, and deep sleep. They also correspond to the three realms of existence: earth, atmosphere, and heaven. The fourth state, beyond these three, is silence or pure consciousness, which is symbolized by the dot above the crescent in the Om symbol. Om Parvat is thus a representation of the ultimate reality that transcends the phenomenal world.


== Sacred Status ==
It is considered sacred by Hindus and its snow deposition pattern resembles the sacred 'Om' (ॐ). Near Om Parvat, Parvat Lake and "Jonglingkong Lake". Jonglingkong Lake is sacred, as Lake Manasarovar, to the Hindus.


== Om Parvat yatra circuit ==

Om Parvat can be viewed on the route to the Kailash Manasarovar Yatra from the last camp (Nabhidhang Pass west of KMVN Huts) enroute Lipulekh Pass. India claim it in Indian Uttarakhand side on Dharchula, Pithoragarh district, India. Where as Nepal, claim it in Darchula District, Nepal. It has always been the sacred mountain for Hindus among all over the world. Many trekkers to Adi Kailash in Kuthi Valley often make a diversion at Gunji to view Om Parvat. Om Parvat is located east of Nabhi Dhang camp on Mount Kailash-Lake Manasarovar yatra route. Mount Kailash could be viewed from the Limpiyadhura Pass as well as the Old Lipulekh Pass (couple of kilometer west of Lipulekh Pass).


== The Importance of Om Parvat in Hinduism ==
Om Parvat is considered to be a sacred place for Hindus, as it is believed to be associated with Lord Shiva, the supreme deity of Hinduism. Shiva is the destroyer and transformer of evil and ignorance, and the source of all knowledge and wisdom. He is also the patron of yoga and meditation, which are practices that aim to achieve union with the divine. Om Parvat is said to be a manifestation of Shiva’s power and grace, and a place where one can experience his presence and blessings.
Om Parvat is also a part of the Kailash Manasarovar Yatra, a pilgrimage that involves visiting Mount Kailash and Lake Manasarovar in Tibet. These are considered to be the most sacred sites in Hinduism, as they are associated with various legends and myths involving Shiva and other gods and goddesses. The pilgrimage is said to be a journey of purification and liberation from the cycle of birth and death. Om Parvat can be viewed on the route to the Kailash Manasarovar Yatra from Nabhidhang camp which is near the Lipulekh Pass that connects India and Tibet.


== Adi Kailash Yatra Circuit ==

The Adi Kailash or Shiva Kailash is located in a different direction from the Om Parvat. Adi Kailash is located near Sin La pass and near Brahma Parvat. The base camp of Adi Kailash is 17 km from the Kuthi (Kuti) village in Kuthi Valley at sacred Jolingkong Lake which has a Hindu Shiva temple on its bank.
The Adi Kailash Yatra Circuit begins by going up the Darma Valley and then going to Kuthi Yankti Valley  via the Sin La pass to join the Mount Kailash-Lake Manasarovar Tibetan pilgrimage route down the Sharda River.


== See also ==
Gunji, Uttarakhand
Om beach


== References ==