Madison Hubbell (born February 24, 1991) is an American former ice dancer. She competed with Zachary Donohue from 2011 to 2022. With him, she is a two-time 2022 Winter Olympics medalist, a four-time World medalist, the 2018 Grand Prix Final champion, the 2014 Four Continents champion, and a three-time U.S. national champion (2018–2019, 2021).
She competed in ice dance with her brother Keiffer Hubbell from 2001 to 2011. With him, she is the 2010 Four Continents bronze medalist, 2006 JGP Final champion, and two-time U.S. national pewter medalist (2009, 2011).


== Personal life ==
Madison Hubbell was born on February 24, 1991, in Lansing, Michigan. She is the daughter of Susan, a seamstress, and Brad Hubbell, a lawyer, and has two older brothers, Keiffer and Zachary.
Hubbell began dating Spanish ice dancer Adrián Díaz in 2014. The couple announced their engagement in April 2018. They got married on June 7, 2023, in Vilanova i la Geltrú, Spain. They have a daughter, Chloe, born in February 2024.


== Early career ==
Madison Hubbell started skating as a five-year-old. She began ice dancing at age eight, skating with her first partner, Nicholas Donahue, for one year. She teamed up with her brother, Keiffer Hubbell, in early 2001. They originally represented the Lansing Skating Club in competition.
Competing on the juvenile level, the Hubbells placed 7th at the 2002 U.S. Junior Championships and won gold at the 2003 U.S. Junior Championships. They began representing the Ann Arbor Figure Skating Club in the 2003–2004 season. They won gold competing on the intermediate level at the 2004 U.S. Junior Championships.
In the 2004–2005 season, the Hubbells moved up to the novice level, which is the first level that competes at the U.S. Championships. At the 2005 U.S. Championships, the Hubbells finished 5th overall. At the Estonia International Dance Competition, which was their first major international event, the Hubbells won all three segments of the competition and won the gold medal. This medal qualified the Hubbells for the USFSA reserve team for the following season.
The Hubbells won the novice silver medal at the 2006 U.S. Championships, scoring 1.39 points less than the champions, Cathy Reed / Chris Reed.


=== 2006–2007 season: Junior debut ===
The Hubbells moved up to the junior level both nationally and internationally. Making their ISU Junior Grand Prix debut in Courchevel, France, the Hubbells placed second in the compulsory and original dances and then won the free dance. They won the silver medal behind Ekaterina Bobrova / Dmitri Soloviev by a margin of 0.78 points. The Hubbells were then assigned to their second event, in The Hague, Netherlands. They placed third in the compulsory dance segment and then won both the original and free dances to win the gold medal overall by a margin of victory of 1.84 points ahead of silver medalists Grethe Grünberg / Kristian Rand. These two placements combined qualified them for the 2006–2007 ISU Junior Grand Prix Final, for which the Hubbells were the third-ranked qualifiers. Qualifying for the event had also given them a bye to the U.S. Championships.
At the Junior Grand Prix Final, the Hubbells placed second in the Midnight Blues compulsory dance by a margin of 0.17 points behind Bobrova/Soloviev. They won both the original and free dances to win the gold medal overall by a margin of victory of 2.17 points ahead of silver medalists and training mates Emily Samuelson / Evan Bates.
At the 2007 U.S. Championships, the Hubbells placed second in both compulsory dances behind Samuelson/Bates. They won the original dance and went into the free dance in first place overall, where they placed second. They won the silver medal overall, placing second by a margin of 0.17 points behind champions Samuelson / Bates, and 24.56 points ahead of bronze medalists and training-mates Lynn Kriengkrairut / Logan Giulietti-Schmitt. The top three junior dance teams were named to the 2007 Junior Worlds, and all three junior teams were coached by Yaroslava Nechaeva and Yuri Chesnichenko.
At the 2007 Junior Worlds, the Hubbells both fell in the Silver Samba compulsory dance and placed twelfth in that segment of the competition. They placed fifth in the original dance and fourth in the free dance to move up to place sixth overall.


=== 2007–2008 season ===
The Hubbells withdrew from their 2007–08 Junior Grand Prix events and missed the fall season due to an injury to Keiffer. They returned to competition at the Midwestern Sectional Championships, winning all three segments to qualify for the 2008 U.S. Championships. At the national championships, the Hubbells won the compulsory dance, placed third in the original dance, and then won the free dance to win the gold medal overall. At the 2008 World Junior Championships, the Hubbells placed fifth in all three segments of the competition and fifth overall.


=== 2008–2009 season: Senior national debut ===

The Hubbells moved up to the senior level nationally and remained juniors internationally. They competed on the 2008–09 Junior Grand Prix circuit. At their first event in Mexico City, Mexico, they won all three segments of the competition to win the gold medal by a margin of victory of 17.26 points ahead of silver medalists Kharis Ralph and Asher Hill. The Hubbells were then assigned to their second event, the event in Cape Town, South Africa, where they again won all three segments of the competition to win the gold medal by a margin of victory of 9.25 points ahead of silver medalists Piper Gilles and Zachary Donohue. These two placements combined qualified them for the 2008–09 ISU Junior Grand Prix Final, for which the Hubbells were the top-ranked qualifiers. Qualifying for the Junior Grand Prix Final also gave them a bye to the U.S. Championships.
The Junior Grand Prix Final was held for the first time concurrently with the Grand Prix Final and therefore did not include a compulsory dance segment. The Hubbells fell during the original dance and placed sixth in that segment of the competition. They placed second in the free skate and won the silver medal overall, scoring 6.47 points less than champions Madison Chock and Greg Zuerlein.
The Hubbells made their senior national debut at the 2009 U.S. Championships. They placed fourth in the compulsory dance, the original dance, and the free dance, to place fourth overall and win the pewter medal. At the 2009 World Junior Championships, the Hubbells placed second in the compulsory dance, third in the original dance, and fourth in the free skate to place fourth overall, scoring 0.46 points less than bronze medalists Ekaterina Riazanova and Jonathan Guerreiro.


=== 2009–2010 season: Four Continents bronze ===
Following the 2009 Trophée Éric Bompard competition, the Hubbells moved from Yaroslava Nechaeva and Yuri Chesnichenko, who had coached them in Ann Arbor, Michigan for ten years, to Pasquale Camerlengo and Anjelika Krylova in Detroit. They won the bronze medal at the 2010 Four Continents Championships.


=== 2010–2011 season ===
The Hubbells finished fourth at the 2011 U.S. Championships. On May 12, 2011, they announced the end of their partnership. Keiffer had experienced hip and back problems and was undecided about his future.


== Hubbell and Donohue ==


=== 2011–2012 season ===

On May 12, 2011, U.S. Figure Skating announced that Hubbell had teamed up with Zachary Donohue. The two decided to train at the Detroit Skating Club under the guidance of the coaching team of Pasquale Camerlengo, Anjelika Krylova, and Natalia Annenko-Deller.
Hubbell and Donohue made their international debut at the 2011 Nebelhorn Trophy, winning the gold medal. After taking bronze at the 2012 U.S. Championships, they were selected to compete at two ISU Championships; they placed fifth at the 2012 Four Continents in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and tenth at the 2012 World Championships in Nice, France.


=== 2012–2013 season ===
Hubbell and Donohue took bronze at the 2012 Finlandia Trophy and competed at two Grand Prix events. They placed fifth at the 2012 Skate Canada International and fourth at the 2012 Trophée Éric Bompard (second in the free dance). After finishing fourth at the 2013 U.S. Championships, they were not selected for any ISU Championships.


=== 2013–2014 season: Four Continents gold ===

After sustaining a concussion in June 2013, Hubbell spent six weeks recuperating. She attributed the injury to a "lack of focus, as painful as that is to admit. I finished twizzles, I did my 3-turn, and I fell off my heel."
Hubbell and Donohue won gold at the 2013 Nebelhorn Trophy, placed fourth at the 2013 Skate America, and won their first Grand Prix medal, bronze, at the 2013 Skate Canada International. After placing fourth at the 2014 U.S. Championships, they were assigned to the 2014 Four Continents Championships and finished ahead of Piper Gilles and Paul Poirier to take the gold medal. Hubbell and Donohue were first alternates for the 2014 World Championships but did not take the slot made available when Meryl Davis and Charlie White withdrew; Hubbell had sustained a torn labrum in her left hip and underwent surgery in March 2014.


=== 2014–2015 season ===
Hubbell and Donohue won bronze at both of their Grand Prix events, the 2014 Skate Canada International and 2014 Trophée Éric Bompard, and then took bronze at the 2015 U.S. Championships. They placed 10th at the 2015 World Championships in Shanghai, China.
On April 13, 2015, Hubbell and Donohue announced that they had started training with Marie-France Dubreuil and Patrice Lauzon at the Centre Gadbois in Montreal.


=== 2015–2016 season ===
In November 2015, Hubbell and Donohue won their first Grand Prix title, taking gold at the 2015 Trophée Éric Bompard in Bordeaux as a result of their first place in the short dance, ahead of Canada's Piper Gilles and Paul Poirier. The second day of competition was canceled due to the November 2015 Paris attacks. After winning bronze at the 2015 NHK Trophy, the two qualified to their first Grand Prix Final, where they finished sixth.
Hubbell and Donohue took the bronze medal at the 2016 U.S. Championships. They placed fourth at the 2016 Four Continents Championships in Taipei and sixth at the 2016 World Championships in Boston.


=== 2016–2017 season ===
Ranked third in both segments at the 2017 U.S. Championships, Hubbell and Donohue remained national bronze medalists for a third consecutive year. In February, they placed fourth in the short dance, sixth in the free, and fourth overall at the 2017 Four Continents Championships in Gangneung, South Korea.
In March, Hubbell and Donohue won a small bronze medal for their short dance at the 2017 World Championships in Helsinki, Finland. They dropped to ninth overall after placing tenth in the free dance.


=== 2017–2018 season: World silver ===
Hubbell and Donohue began their season with gold at the 2017 CS U.S. International Classic. After taking bronze at the 2017 Skate Canada International and silver at the 2017 NHK Trophy, they qualified to their third consecutive Grand Prix Final. They finished fourth at the event in Nagoya, Japan.
At the 2018 U.S. Championships, Hubbell and Donohue placed second behind Maia and Alex Shibutani in the short dance and then second to Madison Chock and Evan Bates in the free dance. They won their first national title by a margin of 0.19 over the Shibutanis and 0.52 over Chock/Bates. All of the ice dancing medalists were named to the U.S. Olympic team.
Hubbell and Donohue were not selected for the team event, but competed in the individual ice dancing event. In the short dance, they placed third, behind Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir and Gabriella Papadakis and Guillaume Cizeron, and 0.02 points ahead of the Shibutanis. In the free dance, Donohue put both hands down in the middle of a sliding move, which constituted a technical fall. As a result, they finished fifth in the free dance and fourth overall.
In March, Hubbell and Donohue won silver at the 2018 World Championships in Milan, having placed second in both segments.


=== 2018–2019 season: World bronze ===
Beginning the season again with a win at the U.S. Classic, Hubbell and Donohue were assigned to consecutive Grand Prix events, the 2018 Skate America and 2018 Skate Canada International.  They won gold at both events, becoming the first team to qualify for the Grand Prix Final.  After victory at Skate Canada International, Hubbell observed, "we wanted to challenge ourselves to become champions in difficult situations, and we knew that it was going to be really challenging to do two Grand Prix back to back at the beginning of the season."  At the Grand Prix Final, they placed first in both programs and won the title.
At the 2019 U.S. Championships, facing a returning Chock and Bates, they won their second straight national title.  They next competed at the 2019 Four Continents Championships, placing first in the rhythm dance with a new personal best.  In the free dance, they unexpectedly dropped to fourth place following multiple errors, including receiving only a base level on their stationary lift after it was deemed non-stationary.  As a result, they finished off the podium behind Chock and Bates, Kaitlyn Weaver and Andrew Poje, and Gilles and Poirier.  Hubbell commented after, "certainly we would rather it happens here than the Worlds."
Hubbell and Donohue placed fourth in the rhythm dance at the 2019 World Championships, but overtook Alexandra Stepanova and Ivan Bukin in the free dance to place third overall, winning the bronze. Hubbell called it "our strongest performance this season", saying that their "goal was to do our best performance and the rest we can't control, and that was really what we have achieved."  They next were part of the gold medal-winning Team USA at the 2019 World Team Trophy, concluding their season.


=== 2019–2020 season: Four Continents bronze ===
For the musical-themed rhythm dance, Hubbell and Donohue chose to skate a Marilyn Monroe program, a longtime goal of Hubbell's. Hubbell and Donohue were again assigned to the same consecutive events for the Grand Prix.  They became two-time Skate America champions with a total of 209.55 points after placing first with a personal best of 84.97 points in the rhythm dance and second in the free dance with a score of 124.58, 0.08 points behind the free dance score of silver medalists Stepanova/Bukin. Donohue was suffering from bronchitis at the time of the event and commented that he hoped to have "two working lungs" by their next competition the following week.  At 2019 Skate Canada International the following week, they narrowly led after the rhythm dance, 0.63 points ahead of Gilles/Poirier. They placed second in the free dance, and took the silver medal, in what was considered a significant upset loss.
Qualifying to the Grand Prix Final, Hubbell and Donohue placed second in the rhythm dance. Third in the free dance after having revised nine of the program elements in the interim since Skate Canada International, they won the bronze medal overall.
Entering the 2020 U.S. Championships seeking to win a third consecutive title, they placed second in the rhythm dance, with Donohue slightly losing balance at one point in the Finnstep pattern and their lift being graded at only a level 3. They finished second in the free dance as well, struggling after they came out of their dance spin facing the wrong direction, prompting Hubbell to comment that it was "probably one of the hardest performances, not enjoyable."  They won the silver medal behind Chock and Bates.
Returning to the Four Continents Championships after the disappointment of the previous year, Hubbell and Donohue won the rhythm dance again, albeit by a margin of only 0.03 over Chock and Bates, and 2.03 points ahead of Gilles and Poirier in third. In the free dance, both made errors in their twizzle sequence, and they dropped to third place, winning the bronze medal. Hubbell admitted afterward that "our free dance has been a rocky one for us this season."  They were assigned to compete at the World Championships in Montreal, but these were canceled as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.


=== 2020–2021 season: World silver ===
Hubbell and Donohue recruited former training partner and double-Olympic champion Scott Moir as one of their choreographers for the new season, planning to regain momentum lost in the previous year, which they attributed in part to losing confidence in their programs after their loss at Skate Canada.  With the ISU assigning the Grand Prix based mainly on training location to minimize international travel, Hubbell and Donohue were nevertheless assigned to the 2020 Skate America in Las Vegas and crossed the border to compete. They won the event for the third consecutive year.
Hubbell and Donohue returned to the United States again for the 2021 U.S. Championships, also held in Las Vegas.  They placed second in the rhythm dance, 0.44 points behind Chock and Bates, who had not competed at Skate America due to injury.  They won the free dance, skating cleanly, and took their third national title.  They were named to the American team for the 2021 World Championships in Stockholm.
The World Championships were held without an audience, and Hubbell and Donohue's training partners and four-time World champions Papadakis and Cizeron declined to attend due to illness and lack of training time, leading to a very contested podium.  Hubbell and Donohue placed second in the rhythm dance, two points behind Sinitsina and Katsalapov of Russia and narrowly ahead of Chock and Bates.  They were third in the free dance, behind Sinitsina and Katsalapov and Canada's Gilles and Poirier, but remained in second overall by 0.36 points over Gilles and Poirier and won their second silver medal. Their placement combined with Chock and Bates' fourth qualified three berths for American ice dance teams at the 2022 Winter Olympics.


=== 2021–2022 season: Olympic medals and World silver ===
Hubbell and Donohue announced heading into the 2021–22 season that it would be their last before retiring. They won the 2021 U.S. International Classic as their opening assignment, which for that season was not part of the Challenger series.
On the Grand Prix, Hubbell and Donohue began at 2021 Skate America, competing against primary domestic rivals Chock and Bates. They won both segments of the competition to take the gold medal, their fourth consecutive at the event and prevailing over Chock and Bates by 1.31 points. Donohue remarked afterward on his "overwhelming gratitude, being our last Skate America and four consecutive wins for us, it means quite a lot, especially to be able to have a live audience" following the pandemic restrictions in the preceding year and a half. They were initially assigned to the 2021 Cup of China as their second Grand Prix, but following its cancellation, they were reassigned to the 2021 Gran Premio d'Italia. With training partners Papadakis and Cizeron also assigned to the event, Hubbell and Donohue were the presumptive silver medalists, and finished second in both segments of the competition despite a late-program flub on their free dance choreographic lift. Hubbell joked afterward, "we made a mistake at the end, but sometimes you jump in the air, and you hit your partner in the crotch." Their results qualified them to the Grand Prix Final, but it was subsequently canceled due to restrictions prompted by the Omicron variant.
Seeking to defend their title at the 2022 U.S. Championships, Hubbell and Donohue placed second in the rhythm dance due to errors, ending up 2.55 points behind Chock and Bates. They went on to win the free dance but remained in second place overall. Hubbell said, "we wanted to end our career here at the U.S. Championships with a performance that felt present, and we're both very satisfied with how we skated. I think stepping off the ice; we knew we were content with what we put out there." They were subsequently named to the American Olympic team.
Hubbell and Donohue began the 2022 Winter Olympics as the American entries in the rhythm dance segment of the Olympic team event. They scored a new personal best of 86.56 to win the segment, securing ten points for the American team and notably prevailing over reigning World champions Sinitsina and Katsalapov of the ROC. Donohue, pleased with the results, said that "opening up our Olympics this way is really an honor. Originally the U.S won the silver medal, however following a positive doping test of Russia's gold medalist Kamila Valieva, the team members were not awarded their medals, pending an investigation. In January 2024, the Court of Arbitration for Sport disqualified her, and the gold medal was awarded to the U.S. team. This was Hubbell and Donohue's first Olympic medal. In the ice dance event, they finished in third place in the rhythm dance with another new personal best score of 87.13. Third in the free dance, despite a deduction for an extended lift, they won the bronze medal.
Hubbell and Donohue concluded their competitive careers at the 2022 World Championships, held in Montpellier. They finished second in the rhythm dance with a personal best score of 89.72, 3.01 points behind training mates Papadakis and Cizeron. In the free dance they set another personal best (132.67) as well as a personal best for total score (222.39), winning their third World silver medal. With Papadakis and Cizeron taking the gold medal and Chock and Bates the bronze, the entire podium consisted of skaters from the Ice Academy of Montreal. Hubbell said, "we knew that we wanted to skate our best for each other for our last moment, and we found peace in that. We're just very happy."
During the 2024 Paris Olympics, a medal ceremony was held for Hubbell/Donohue and their teammates from the 2022 Olympic Figure Skating Team Event, where they were awarded their Olympic gold medals.


== Coaching career ==
In the summer of 2022, it was announced that she and future husband, Adrián Díaz, would begin coaching and choreographing for ice dancers at the Ice Academy of Montreal campus in London, Ontario alongside Scott Moir.
His current students include:

 Christina Carreira / Anthony Ponomarenko
 Leia Dozzi / Pietro Papetti
 Haley Sales / Nikolas Wamsteeker
As a choreographer, his clients have included:

 Lia Pereira / Trennt Michaud
 Emmanuelle Proft / Nicolas Nadeau
 Madeline Schizas
 Utana Yoshida / Masaya Morita


== Programs ==


=== With Donohue ===


=== With Hubbell ===


== Competitive highlights ==


=== Ice dance with Zachary Donohue ===


=== Ice dance with Keiffer Hubbell ===


== Detailed results ==


=== Ice dance with Zachary Donohue ===

Note: The 2015 Trophée Éric Bompard was cancelled after the November 2015 Paris attacks. The short programs had been completed on November 13, but the free skating was to be held the next day. On November 23, the International Skating Union announced that the short program results would be considered as the final results for the competition.


== References ==


== External links ==

Madison Hubbell & Zachary Donohue official website
Madison Hubbell & Zachary Donohue at the International Skating Union
Madison Hubbell at Team USA (archive June 24, 2023)
Madison Hubbell at Olympics.com 
Madison Hubbell at Olympedia (archive) 
Madison Hubbell & Zachary Donohue at SkatingScores.com
Madison Hubbell & Keiffer Hubbell at SkatingScores.com