Delhi Public School, Faridabad is a School in Sector 19, Faridabad, Haryana, India founded on 10 July 1995.


== History ==
DPS Faridabad was founded by Shri U.S. Verma in 1995 at Sector 19, Faridabad. Its current principal is Mr. Anil Kumar. It is also considered as one of the best schools in Faridabad.


== Infrastructure ==
DPS Faridabad covers an area of 8 acres (32,001m2) and includes a hostel, a playing field, a canteen, an auditorium, gardens, and a school building.
The School has a SIS (student information system) Department for effective digital information and communication.
The school has installed a solar power plant on its rooftop to meet all of its power requirements and even supplies electricity to the Haryana Government.
The school currently enrolls over 4000 students as day scholars and hostelers and conducts classes from preschool to senior secondary level.
It also conducts a social responsibility programme called DPS Shiksha Kendra for underprivileged children, providing them with equipment such as books, stationery and uniforms as well as education. It is managed by Delhi Public School Society.
The school has tie-up with Bangalore-based company for their app Northstar to ensure child safety by tracking their movement to and from school. All transports are highly equipped with CCTV cameras for surveillance.
Recently, a space observatory has been built atop the school building for Astronomical and Educational purposes, under the success of the Chandrayaan-3 moon mission programme. The observatory, known as 'SOAR' (Space Observation and Research Centre) is managed by Space India, and has a telescope, computers (for processing images), and other equipment. The school has introduced astronomy classes which take use of the observatory. In the famous words of principal Anil Kumar, "It's first of a kind, one of a kind, and for now, the only of its kind."

Aside from the observatory, the school introduced a new 'micro-school' in 2021, which follows the Cambridge Educational Curriculum. It has over 300 students, and has a democratically elected student council system. Students from it are similar to aliens for students of the CBSE board. 


== Sports ==
DPS Faridabad participates in regional athletics competitions. There have been many students who have achieved national or international medals in athletic competitions, such as Anandita Upadhyay, who has won multiple awards in tennis.


== Notable alumni ==
Rahul Dalal, cricketer
CarryMinati, Youtuber and influencer.
Archit Manas, International Mathematics Olympiad bronze medallist, 2023.


== Court case ==
Delhi Public School, Faridabad vs State of Haryana and Others on 22 April 2015 resulted in the reinstatement of the falsely charged principal Anil Kumar after a period of 8 years.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website