Emperor March: Live at the Blue Note is a live album by the Charles Tolliver Big Band, led by trumpeter and composer Charles Tolliver. It was recorded on July 10 and 11, 2008, at  the Blue Note Jazz Club in New York City, and was issued in 2009 by Half Note Records, Tolliver's first release as a leader for the label.


== Reception ==

In a review for AllMusic, Ken Dryden called the album "a potent follow-up" to Tolliver's previous release, With Love, and wrote: "Beautifully recorded and mixed with an attentive audience, this is an essential release for modern big-band aficionados."
Troy Collins of All About Jazz stated: "Tolliver's multi-generational band burns with a fervor typical of younger groups. Incorporating an exhilarating mix of interlocking layers, sudden tempo shifts, and dramatic mood changes, this veteran ensemble negotiates Tolliver's cantilevered charts with the graceful fluidity of a unit a fraction its size."
NPR Music's Kevin Whitehead commented: "Tolliver's mass trumpet, saxes and trombones call out to each other like friendly rivals who are on the same side... [the album] shows why a few idealists continue to mount these high overhead, lucky if we break even ensembles of a dozen and a half players."
Writer Doug Ramsey remarked: "Tolliver melds new departures with traditional values that include dynamite writing for brass. His solos and those by veterans Stanley Cowell, piano, and Billy Harper, tenor saxophone, are superb... The first and final passages of Tolliver's title tune... has riff-like qualities that could embed it in the public consciousness – if the public were to again became conscious of jazz."


== Track listing ==
"I Want to Talk About You" composed by Billy Eckstine. Remaining tracks composed by Charles Tolliver.

"On the Nile" – 13:33
"I Want to Talk About You" – 7:06
"Emperor March" – 13:51
"Chedlike" – 5:35
"In the Trenches" – 10:02
"Toughin'" – 11:22


== Personnel ==
Charles Tolliver – conductor
Todd Bashore – alto saxophone, flute, piccolo
Bruce Williams – alto saxophone, soprano saxophone, clarinet, flute
Billy Harper – tenor saxophone
Marcus Strickland – tenor saxophone
Bill Saxton – tenor saxophone, soprano saxophone, clarinet, flute
Jason Marshall – baritone saxophone, bass clarinet
Michael Williams – lead trumpet
Cameron Johnson – trumpet
Keyon Harrold – trumpet
Ernest Stewart – trombone
Jason Jackson – trombone
Michael Dease – trombone
Stafford Hunter – trombone
Aaron Johnson – bass trombone
Stanley Cowell – piano (track 1)
Anthony Wonsey – piano (tracks 2–6)
Reggie Workman – double bass
Gene Jackson – drums


== References ==