The MARSS Interceptor is an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) designed by MARSS Group for counter-unmanned aerial systems (C-UAS) use.


== Interceptor-MR ==
The Interceptor Medium Range was first displayed in March 2022. It is designed as a hard-kill countermeasure that rams hostile drones, using kinetic energy to destroy them rather than an explosive warhead, which would be more restrictive in places like urban areas. The air vehicle is electrically powered and is propelled by four ducted fan rotors, two larger fans on the top and underneath providing thrust and two smaller fans at the wingtips for steering. This propulsion system enables it to achieve a top speed of 80 m/s (288 km/h; 155 knots). It originally had an overall weight of 10 kg (22 lb) which was later reduced to 8.5 kg and a wingspan of 90 cm. The fuselage is made of carbon fiber and polymer with titanium to reinforce the forward part as well as inserts in the wing leading edges and in the front part of the rotor nacelles. The Interceptor-MR can engage targets out to 5 km and at altitudes over 2 km, and maneuver up to 4 g.
Fitted with an imaging infrared sensor in the nose and combined with artificial intelligence algorithms from the company's NiDAR system that targets a drone's underside or front, it can autonomously engage with a 90% chance of scoring a successful hit, and it has the ability to re-engage if it misses. Compared to traditional short-range air defense missiles that can cost between $150,000-$200,000, the Interceptor-MR costs about one-fifth as much and is reusable. It can hit three Class 1 UAVs in a single flight, or one Class 2 drone, and if it still flies after impact it can return to the launch site for repairs. The modular design allows for the front, back, and wings to be rapidly replaced so the whole airframe can be put back into service. The interceptors are launched vertically from a box-type launcher that can be carried by a light vehicle or installed on building roofs, which then transition to horizontal flight.
A larger version of the Interceptor is being developed for taking out Class 3 drones. Instead of using kinetic ramming, it is planned to be equipped with a miniature electronic warfare solution such as a high power microwave system to fly close to a target and neutralize it with RF energy.


== Interceptor-SR ==
Following the debut of the original version, MARSS unveiled the Interceptor Short Range in September 2023. It was developed in direct response to customer demand for a portable C-UAS solution organic to infantry units. The Interceptor-SR shares design features of its predecessor, but is smaller and lighter weighing 1.5 kg with a 30–40 cm (12–16 in) wingspan, which the company is working to reduce to 18 cm (7.1 in) through foldable open propellers. Both designs can be directed to abort an engagement and return to its launch site to be reused. It is able to defeat Class 1 UAVs out to 1 km, and is launched using a man-portable or vehicle-mounted compact launcher.


== See also ==
Anvil
Raytheon Coyote


== References ==


== External links ==
INTERCEPTOR-MR - MARSS
INTERCEPTOR-SR - MARSS