Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader is a 2004 collection of scholarly essays on J. R. R. Tolkien's writings on Middle-earth, edited by Jane Chance. It has been warmly welcomed by critics, though some of the student contributions are less useful than the revised journal articles, conference papers and lectures by the more experienced essayists, who include the established Tolkien scholars Marjorie Burns, Michael D. C. Drout, Verlyn Flieger, Gergely Nagy, Tom Shippey, and Richard C. West.


== Chapter summaries ==


== Reception ==
Chad Engbers writes in The Lion and the Unicorn that the essay authors include "the usual suspects", a small number of well-known Tolkien scholars – here "Nagy, Shippey, Burns, Drout, Flieger, and West", who write knowledgeably in a style "more expository than polemical". A second category, the weakest in Engbers's view, comprises the junior scholars such as Baltasar, Dimond, and Lazo. He finds Baltasar's essay "like a very respectable graduate paper", whereas Dimond says "too little" and Lazo "says too much". A third category is of scholars and authors with established reputations outside Tolkien studies. Jeffrey writes freshly and well on philology, while the novelist Madsen writes an "incisive and honest" assessment of Christianity in The Lord of the Rings. Engbers concludes that while not all the essays are specially useful, "the volume's virtues outnumber its vices".
Carol Leibiger in Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts writes that the essays, by medievalists, Tolkien scholars, and students, are based on a mix of conference papers, lectures by Shippey and Drout, and older articles by Madsen, Zimmer, and Jeffrey from as far back as 1980. In her view, Drout "elegantly and convincingly" shows Tolkien's way of linking to the Anglo-Saxon period, spanning its culture, history, and language, so as to construct a "pseudohistorical mythology" for England. She finds Nagy's comparison of Tolkien's use of myth with Plato's "fascinating", whereas she feels that Straubhaar's use of two "rabid and uni[n]formed" critics (for her discussion of Tolkien and race) spoils her essay. Of the student essays, Lazo is "long-winded", full of self-references, and mistakes. Leibiger concludes that the volume assembles numerous "important studies of the sources of Tolkien's legendarium".
Margaret Sinex writes in Tolkien Studies that this is the second in a series of three essay collections on Tolkien, the other two being the 2003 Tolkien the Medievalist and the 2005 Tolkien's Modern Middle Ages. Four old journal papers are revised for this collection. She finds "appealing" Zimmer's essay on Tolkien's "verbal magic"; it explores incantations or "word magic"; two types of "name magic", involving a taboo on the use of proper names, and the changing of a name when a person's nature changes; and the "true name" which causes what it names. Straubhaar's essay is in Sinex's view "convincing" in its argument that the dynastic marriages between Gondor and Rohan reflect the later Roman Empire's "gradual acceptance of mixed marriages with barbarian tribes on their empire's distant borders." Sinex calls the volume "a superb collection of essays that illuminates Tolkien's own understanding of the nature and function of myth and his process of mythmaking." In her view, it helps the reader to grasp "Tolkien's belief in the creative, generative potency of language".


== See also ==
Tolkien's Art: A 'Mythology for England' – an earlier book about Middle-earth by Jane Chance


== References ==


== Sources ==
Chance, Jane, ed. (2004). Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2301-1.
Engbers, Chad (2006). "Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader (review)". The Lion and the Unicorn. 30 (1): 134–138. doi:10.1353/uni.2006.0003.
Leibiger, Carol A. (2005). "Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader, edited by Jane Chance". Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts. 16 (2): 158–161.
Sinex, Margaret (2006). "Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader (review)". Tolkien Studies. 3 (1): 205–217. doi:10.1353/tks.2006.0030.