Wilton Earl Simpson (born June 28, 1966) is an American politician who has served as the Florida Commissioner of Agriculture since 2023. From 2012 to 2022, he served as a member of the Florida Senate, representing areas around Citrus, Hernando, and Pasco Counties. He was elected Senate President for the 2020–2022 legislature.


== Early life and education ==
Simpson was born in Lakeland, Florida in 1966. He earned an Associate of Arts degree from Pasco–Hernando State College (formerly Pasco–Hernando Community College) in 1997. Simpson has worked for his family's businesses, Simpson Environmental Services and Simpson Farms. For over four decades, he owned and managed a large-scale egg-laying operation that supplied families across the state.


== Political career ==


=== Florida Senate ===
Following the reconfiguration of Florida Senate districts in 2012, Simpson ran in the newly created 18th District, and though he initially anticipated engaging State Representative John Legg in a "very difficult primary," he ended up winning the nomination of the Republican Party and the general election unopposed when Legg decided to run in an adjacent district and his only Democratic opponent, a college student, dropped out.
While serving in the legislature, Simpson was given control by Florida Senate President Don Gaetz over the reform of the Florida Retirement System, and announced that he would either accept the plan proposed by the Florida House of Representatives, which was "a sweeping...plan that would close the FRS pension system to all new employees who become eligible after January 1, 2014," or his own plan, "which would only close the pension plan to senior management and elected officials who become eligible after July 1, 2014. However, on April 30, 2013, the Florida Senate rejected a plan similar to the House proposal, and as the 2013 session closed out, Simpson conceded that there would be no reforms for the rest of the year. Simpson had more success, however, with legislation dealing with the restoration of the Everglades, whereby taxes on farmers in the region would be maintained until the 2030s, $880 million would be allocated for water quality restoration, and $32 million would be spent annually on reducing the amount of phosphorus that flows into the region, which was unanimously approved by the legislature.
Simpson's district was reconfigured and renumbered after court-ordered redistricting in 2016. In 2022, Simpson supported a measure which would allow "regulators to impose fees and barriers to rooftop solar installation." According to the bill sponsor, the proposal would have protected non-solar customers from shouldering the costs of maintaining the electrical grid that rooftop solar customers also use.
As a lifelong farmer, Simpson championed several agriculture-focused policies in the Florida Senate. This included increased legal protections for agricultural operations through the Right to Farm Act, reducing the tax burden on farmers by strengthening Florida’s greenbelt laws, and expanding Agritourism throughout Florida.
In 2019, Simpson passed Florida’s ban on texting while driving. At the bill’s passage, Simpson said: “Many, many lives will be saved by the texting and driving bill; many more lives would be saved by a hands-free bill.”
On November 17, 2020, Simpson was elected Senate president for the 2020–2022 legislature. During his tenure as Senate President, Simpson prioritized making improvements to the child welfare and foster care system, boosted funding for environmental and land conservation programs, provided bonuses and pay increases to first responders, funded improvements to Florida's roadways and seaports, and supported Florida's communities and businesses during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Simpson played a leading role throughout the COVID-19 pandemic in Florida. This included his appointment to Governor DeSantis’ Re-Open Florida Task Force and ensuring there were little to no budget disruptions during the economic downturn. Privately, Simpson donated 500,000 eggs to various non-profit groups to aid struggling families impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As Senate President, Simpson also oversaw Florida’s constitutionally-required redistricting process for its congressional and state legislative districts. The Florida Supreme Court noted in the opinion that “for the first time since the voters adopted the existing procedural framework for judicial review of apportionment in 1968, no one appeared to oppose the Legislature’s plans.”
In 2021, Simpson also championed the successful passage of the Florida Wildlife Corridor Act, which added 8 million acres of protected lands for wildlife to the 10 million acres already under State protection. The act also directed the state of Florida to better protect and connect Florida’s natural areas and habitats wildlife habitats and to preserve working agricultural lands from future development. To provide Florida’s parents more educational choices, Simpson oversaw the successful passage in 2022 of House Bill 7045, which created a historic expansion of school choice hat increased eligibility and streamlined key school choice scholarship programs for students with unique abilities and students from lower income families. Simpson was also a driving force behind Florida’s child welfare reforms in 2022. These reforms included improvements to Florida’s foster care system and increased accountability for state institutions.
Despite media controversy, Simpson passed Florida’s Parental Rights in Education Act, which banned sexual education in Florida’s K-3 classrooms. While signing the bill into law, Governor Ron DeSantis said that the bill “empowers Florida parents and safeguards our children.”


=== Candidate for Florida Agriculture Commissioner ===

In September 2021, Simpson announced he was running for Florida Agriculture Commissioner in the 2022 election cycle. In the Republican Primary election, Simpson was challenged by James Shaw. Simpson won against Shaw with 64.7% of the vote. Simpson was endorsed by Governor Ron DeSantis. DeSantis said of Simpson: “For Commissioner of Agriculture, I am supporting Wilton Simpson, who has helped pass major reform for election integrity, choice in education, big tech censorship, and law enforcement recruitment.”
President Donald Trump, 59 Florida Sheriffs, The NRA, Florida Farm Bureau FarmPAC, The Florida Police Benevolent Association, Florida Forestry Association, Florida Chamber of Commerce, The Associated Industries of Florida, Colonel Mike Waltz, Attorney General Ashley Moody and CFO Jimmy Patronis all endorsed Wilton Simpson for Agriculture Commissioner.
Simpson faced Democrat Naomi Blemur in the General Election and won with 59.3% of the vote. After winning, Simpson said, “As I traveled the state over this last year, what I’ve learned is that Floridians are resilient and willing to fight for the American Dream. I am honored that you have entrusted me to continue that fight with them as Florida’s next Agriculture Commissioner.


=== Priorities as Florida Agriculture Commissioner ===
Upon taking office on January 3, 2023, Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Wilton Simpson has worked to secure the future of farming in the state of Florida, encourage the purchase of Florida-grown food, defend second amendment rights, and define agriculture and food security as a national security issue.
In January of 2023, with Simpson’s support, the Florida legislature passed Senate Bill 214, the Florida Firearms and Ammo Act.” This legislation created increased limitations on how financial institutions tracked firearm purchases in Florida. Simpson said after the legislation was signed into law, “The ‘Florida Arms and Ammo Act’ draws a line in the sand and tells multi-national progressive financial institutions, and their allies in Washington, that they cannot covertly create a backdoor firearm registry of Floridians – or else.”
Simpson has also prioritized the preservation of agricultural lands through the Rural and Family Lands Protection Program, an agricultural land preservation program designed to protect important agricultural lands through the acquisition of permanent agricultural land conservation easements. In May of 2023, Governor DeSantis and his cabinet (including Simpson) approved the preservation of 18,279.38 acres as part of this program thereby protecting the state’s food production capabilities.


=== Community Involvement ===
Simpson has become notable in Hernando and Pasco Counties for his philanthropic work in the area. In 2012, the Simpson Breast Health Center opened in Zephyrhills, Florida. The center provides numerous services for women and breast cancer patients.
In June of 2022, the Hernando County School Board approved the construction of the Wilton Simpson Technical College, to be located at the Dennis Wilfong Center for Success. School Superintendent, John Stratton, said of the project: “Mr. Simpson has been a driving force for the technical center. We appreciate his unwavering support for Hernando County schools.”
Another cancer treatment center, The Moffitt Cancer Center, honored Simpson in 2023 by dedicating a new wing to the Florida politician at their new campus. The “W.E. Simpson Concourse for Cures” will be able to provide advanced treatment to the surrounding community.


== References ==


== External links ==
Florida State Senate – Wilton Simpson
Simpson for Commissioner of Agriculture