Musa Amshi Muhammad Al-Amin (born 13 March 1994), better known as Ameen Amshi, is a Nigerian engineer and politician. Ameen is currently serving as the Senior Special Assistant to the President on Special Duties in the Office of the Vice, Kashim Shettima.
Prior to his appointment as SSA, he was a member of the Youth Wing of the All Progressives Congress (APC) during the buildup to Nigeria’s 2023 Presidential Election.


== Early life and education ==
Ameen Amshi was born in Maiduguri, on 13 March 1994, to a father from the Bade ethnic group in Yobe State and a mother from Adamawa State. He studied at Guangzhou City Construction College, China, earning a Diploma in Chinese and Culture in 2014. He later gained admission to Guangdong University of Petrochemical Technology, Guangdong, China, and earned a degree (B.Eng.) in Petrochemical Engineering in 2018.
He returned to Nigeria for his one-year mandatory National Youth Service Corps (NYSC) program and served in the Office of the Senior Special Adviser to the Governor of Kaduna State on Skills Acquisition and Foreign Studies from November 2018 to June 2019. Thereafter, he obtained a master’s degree in International Affairs and Strategic Studies in 2020 from the Nigerian Defense Academy, Kaduna, Kaduna State. He is presently pursuing a PhD in Public Governance and Leadership at the University of Abuja.


== Career ==
After graduating, Ameen Amshi worked with the Center for Human Resource Development (CHRD), Kaduna State (2018–2019), and China First Highway Engineering Company (CFHEC), Abuja, as the Special Adviser to the Managing Director and Government Relations Officer for the construction firm between 2020 and 2021. He later served as a Communications and Engineering Officer at ANOH Gas Processing Company Limited, a joint venture of the Nigerian National Petroleum Company Limited (NNPC) and Seplat Energy.
In 2022, he was an aspirant for APC National Youth Leader at the 2022 Convention but stepped down for another aspirant from the South-West due to a zoning arrangement.
During the buildup to the 2023 Nigerian General Election, Ameen Amshi was a member of the APC Presidential Campaign Council and a member of the APC 2023 Presidential Election Youth Campaign Council.
On 17 September 2023, President Bola Tinubu appointed Ameen Amshi as the Senior Special Assistant to the President on Special Duties in the Office of the Vice President.


== Professional membership ==
In addition to holding more than 10 certifications in engineering and quality assurance, Amshi is a member of professional bodies, including the Council for the Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria (COREN).


== Personal life ==
Ameen Amshi is married with a child. He is a polyglot, who speaks English, Hausa, Arabic, Mandarin, and two other Nigerian dialects fluently.