The Swedish Army (Swedish: Svenska Armén) is the land force of the Swedish Armed Forces of the Kingdom of Sweden in Northern Europe / Scandinavia. The army's history dates back to the Swedish War of Liberation in 1521.


== History ==

Svea Life Guards dates back to the year 1521, when the men of Dalarna chose 16 young able men as body guards for the insurgent nobleman Gustav Vasa in the Swedish War of Liberation against the Danish-dominated Union of Kalmar, thus making the present-day Life Guards one of the world's oldest regiments still on active duty.
In 1901, Sweden introduced conscription. The conscription system was abolished in 2010 but reinstated in 2017.


== Organisation ==
The peace-time organisation of the Swedish Army is divided into a number of regiments for the different branches. The number of active regiments has been reduced since the end of the Cold War in the late 1980s. However the Swedish Army has begun to expand once again, due to an increasing threat from the east with a resurgent Russian Federation and its attack on neighboring Ukraine in 2014 / 2022. Thus resulting in longtime neutral Sweden to become a full-fledged member of the 75 year old Western / Central European and North America democratic and military alliance of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). The regiment forms training organizations that train the various battalions of the army and home guard.
The Swedish Armed Forces recently underwent a transformation from conscription-based recruitment to a professional defence organisation increasing to an all-volunteer force. This is part of a larger goal to abandon the mass army from the Cold War era and develop an army better suited to modern maneuver warfare and at the same time retain a higher readiness. Since 2014, the Swedish Army has had around 50,000 soldiers in either full-time or part-time duty, with eight mechanized infantry battalions instantly available at any time and the full force of 71 battalions ready to be deployed within one week. The regular army consists of 8 mechanised maneuver battalions, 19 support battalions of different kinds including artillery battalions, anti-aircraft battalions, combat engineer battalions, rangers, logistics battalions and 4 reserve heavy armoured battalions and 40 territorial defence battalions. The battalion is the core unit but all units are completely modular and can be arranged in combat teams from company to brigade level with different units depending on the task. There are a total of 6 permanent staffs under the central command capable of handling large battlegroups, 4 regional staffs, 3 brigade staffs and 1 divisional staff.


=== Leadership ===

Until 1937 the King was the formal Head of the Army, and until 1974 of the Armed Forces at large. In 1937, the Chief of the Army position and headquarters staff (Swedish: Chefen för armén, CA) was created to lead the Army in peacetime. Following a larger reorganisation of the Swedish Armed Forces in 1994, CA ceased to exist as an independent agency, and all of the Armed Forces was centralized under the Supreme Commander (ÖB). Instead, the post Chief of Army Staff (Swedish: Chefen för arméledningen) was created at the then newly instituted Swedish Armed Forces Headquarters (HKV).
In 1998, the Swedish Armed Forces was yet again reorganized. Most of the duties of the Chief of Army Staff were transferred to the newly instituted post of "Inspector General of the Army" (Swedish: Generalinspektören för armén). The post is similar to that of the "Inspector General of the Swedish Navy" (Swedish: Generalinspektören för marinen) and the "Inspector General of the Swedish Air Force" (Swedish: Generalinspektören för flygvapnet), later renamed to "Inspector of the Army" (Swedish: Arméinspektören). In 2014, the Chief of Army (Swedish: Arméchefen, AC) position was reinstated.


=== Regiments ===

Swedish Army regiments are tasked with training conscripts for the operational battalions of the army's rapid reaction organisation. The Gotland Regiment is the only regiment that also trains Home Guard troops. The currently active regiments and their main peacetime subordinate units are:

Life Guards (LG), in Stockholm
Life Guards Battalion
1st Motorized Infantry Battalion
Guards Battalion trains conscripts for the 1st Infantry Brigade
1st Military Police Battalion
13th Security Battalion
Armed Forces Military Police Unit (FM MPE)
Swedish Armed Forces Music Corps (FöMus)
Armed Forces International Centre (Swedint)
Dalarna Regiment (I 13), in Falun
2x Infantry battalions, in Falun
Norrbotten Regiment (I 19), in Boden
Norrbotten Armoured Battalion (Pbat / I 19) trains the troops of the 191st and 192nd mechanized battalions, and 19th brigade reconnaissance company
Armed Forces Winter Unit (FMVE), in Boden and Arvidsjaur
Västernorrland Regiment (I 21), in Sollefteå
2x Infantry battalions, in Sollefteå
Jämtland Ranger Corps (JFK), in Östersund
Life Regiment Hussars (K 3), in Karlsborg
Training companies, train the troops of the 31st Ranger Battalion and 32nd Intelligence Battalion
Armed Forces Survival School
Norrland Dragoon Regiment (K 4), in Arvidsjaur
Training companies, trains the troops of the 193rd Ranger Battalion
Skaraborg Regiment (P 4), in Skövde
Training unit (KFE), trains the troops of the 41st and 42nd mechanized battalions, 1st heavy transport company, and 4th brigade reconnaissance company, headquarters of the 1st Divisonal Staff
South Scanian Regiment (P 7), in Revingehed
Training unit (KFE), trains the troops of the 71st and 72nd Light Mechanised Battalion
Gotland Regiment (P 18), in Visby
Gotlandsgruppen (GLG), trains and supports the Home Guard on Gotland
Gotland Battalion (32. hvbat), in Visby
Boden Artillery Regiment (A 8) in Boden
Artillery Battalion, trains the troops of the 91st and 92nd artillery battalions
Artillery Combat School
Air Defence Regiment (Lv 6), in Halmstad
Air Defence Battalion, trains the troops of the 61st and 62nd air defence battalions
Göta Engineer Regiment (Ing 2), in Eksjö
Engineer Battalion, trains the troops of the 21st and 22nd engineer battalions
Field Works School
Göta Logistic Regiment (T 2), in Skövde
Training unit, training the troops of the 1st and 2nd logistic battalions


=== Operational formations ===
The Swedish Army distinguishes an administrative from an operational structure. The administrative structure includes the peacetime depot units (depåförband), which are responsible for the training, equipment and combat readiness of the forces. Depot units are the army regiments, the air force flotillas, the naval flotillas or the armed forces centers. The depot units generate wartime units (krigsförband), which are transferred to their respective wartime formations, so normally the Swedish army regiments are composed of administrative and training companies during peacetime and their battalions are only formed for exercises and during wartime. The operational units in their entirety are known as the operational organisation of the armed forces (Försvarsmaktens Insatsorganisation (FM IO or just IO, followed by the year it has been introduced in, as IO 2018 or just IO 18 for example) in Swedish). The operational organisation of the army plans for the training regiments to form two combat brigades (2nd and 3rd Brigades) and a number of independent combat battalions within a few days. This plan, however, was considered by the Supreme Commander to be impossible due to the economic situation at the time.
In 2013, the Armed Forces issued a statement saying that the reorganisation would only suffice for a reasonable defence of Swedish territory for one week. The force was to include the following units:
As of 2022 the 1st Division was reintroduced as an operational  unit. The Division currently contains four brigades; The Norbotten Brigade (Norbottensbrigaden NMekB 19), The South Scanian Brigade (Södra Skånska Brigaden MekB 7, The Life Guards Brigade (Livgardesbrigaden IB 1) and The Skaraborg Brigade (Skaraborgsbrigaden MekB 4)  
As of 2024 the Army's units of the Operational Organisation are:

1st Division (1. divisionen - being raised)
1st Division Staff - in Skövde (1. divisionsstaben)
1st Divisional Staff Battalion (1. divisionstabsbataljonen)
1st Divisional Electronic Warfare Battalion (1. divisionstelekrigbataljon)
1st Divisional Support Battalion (1. divisionsunderhållsbataljonen) Reduced to company size
1st Divisional Engineer Battalion (1. divisionsingenjörbataljonen) Reduced to company size
Life Guards (LG), in Kungsängen
Life Guards Battalion (Livbataljonen)
Staff and support company, life guards company, life guards mounted squadron, cavalry mounted squadron, might be included in the Life Guards Brigade
1st Military Police Battalion (1. militärpolisbataljonen)
Personnel protection company, two military police companies, investigation group
1st Infantry Brigade or Life Guards Brigade (1. infanteribrigaden or livgardesbrigaden IB 1)
1st Motorized Infantry Battalion (1. motoriserade skyttebataljon)
Staff and support company, three Patria AMV mechanized companies, support company, signals company
2nd Motorized Infantry Battalion (2. motoriserade skyttebataljon - being raised)
13th Security Battalion (13. säkerhetsbataljonen)
Staff and operations squadron, land security squadron, sea security company
Life Regiment Hussars (K 3), in Karlsborg
31st Ranger Battalion
Staff and support squadron, three ranger squadrons, logistic squadron
32nd Intelligence Battalion
Functions squadron, two reconnaissance squadrons, parachute ranger company
Norrland Dragoon Regiment (K 4), in Arvidsjaur
Norrland Ranger Battalion (Norrlandsjägarbataljon)
Skaraborg Regiment (P 4), in Skövde
Skaraborg Brigade (Skaraborgsbrigaden MekB 4 - parts of the brigade being raised)
4th Brigade Staff (4. brigadstaben)
4th Brigade Headquarters Company (4. brigadledningskompaniet) Organized from the 11th Command Battalion
4th Brigade Reconnaissance Company (4. brigadspaningskompaniet)
4th Brigade Signals Company (4. brigadsambandskompaniet) Organized from the 12th Signals Battalion
4th Brigade Air Defence Company (4. brigadluftvärnskompaniet)
41st Armored Battalion (41. pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, two Stridsvagn 122 tank companies, two CV90 mechanized companies, logistic company
42nd Armored Battalion (42. Pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, two Stridsvagn 122 tank companies, two CV90 mechanized companies, logistic company
43rd Mechanized Battalion (43. mekaniserade Bataljonen - being raised)
4th Brigade Support Battalion (4. brigadunderhållsbataljonen) Organized from the 1st Logistics Battalion
4th Brigade Engineer Battalion (4. brigadingenjörbataljonen) Organized from the 21st Engineer Battalion
4th Brigade Artillery Battalion (4. brigadartilleribataljonen) Likely organized from the 82nd Artillery Battalion as the 91st and 92nd are being raised
4th Armored Transport Company (4. stridsvagnstransportkompaniet)
Organized from the 1st Heavy Transport Company (1. tungtransportkompaniet)
South Scanian Regiment (P 7), in Revingehed
South Scania Brigade (Södra kånska brigaden MekB 7 - parts of the brigade are being raised)
7th Brigade Staff (7. brigadstaben)
7th Brigade Headquarters Company (7. brigadledningskompaniet)
7th Brigade Reconnaissance Company (7. brigadspaningskompaniet)
7th Brigade Signals Company (7. brigadsambandskompaniet)
7th Brigade Air Defence Company (7. brigadluftvärnskompaniet)
71st Motorized Infantry Battalion (71. motoriserade skyttebataljonen)
Staff and support company, three Patria AMV mechanized companies, logistic company
72nd Armored Battalion (72. pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, two Stridsvagn 122 tank companies, two CV90 mechanized companies, logistic company
73rd Mechanized Battalion (73. mekaniserade bataljonen - being raised)
7th Brigade Support Battalion (7. brigadunderhållsbataljonen)
7th Brigade Engineer Battalion (7. brigadingenjörbataljonen)
7th Brigade Artillery Battalion (7. brigadartilleribataljonen)
7th Armored Transport Company (7. stridsvagnstransportkompaniet)
Dalarna Regiment (I 13), in Falun
131st Infantry Battalion (131. skyttebataljonen - being raised)
132nd Infantry Battalion (132. skyttebataljonen - being raised)
Gotland Regiment (P 18), in Visby
181st Armored Battalion (181. pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, Stridsvagn 122 tank company, CV90 mechanized company, logistic company
Norrbotten Regiment (I 19), in Boden
Norbotten Brigade (Norbottensbrigaden NMekB 19 - parts of the brigade are being raised)
19th Brigade Staff (19. brigadstaben)
19th Brigade Headquarters Company (19. brigadledningskompaniet) Organized from the 11th Command Battalion
19th Brigade Reconnaissance Company (19. brigadspaningskompaniet) equipped with CV90
19th Brigade Signals Company (19. brigadsambandskompaniet)
19th Brigade Air Defence Company (19. brigadluftvärnskompaniet)
191st Armored Battalion (191. pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, two Stridsvagn 122 tank companies, two CV90 mechanized companies, logistic company
192nd Armored Battalion (192. pansarbataljonen)
Staff and support company, two Stridsvagn 122 tank companies, two CV90 mechanized companies, logistic company
193 Mechanized Battalion (193. mekaniserade bataljonen - being raised)
19th Brigade Support Battalion (19. brigadunderhållsbataljonen) Organized from the 2nd Logistics Battalion
19th Brigade Engineer Battalion (19. brigadingenjörbataljonen) Organized from the 22nd Engineer Battalion
19th Brigade Artillery Battalion (19. brigadartilleribataljonen) Likely organized from the 81st Artillery Battalion as the 91st and 92nd are being raised
19th Armored Transport Company (19. stridsvagnstransportkompaniet) Organized from the 1st Heavy Transport Company
Västernorrland Regiment (I 21), in Sollefteå
211th Infantry Battalion (211. skyttebataljonen - being raised)
Jämtland Ranger Corps (Jämtlands fältjägarkår), in Östersund
212th Infantry Battalion (212. skyttebataljonen - being raised)
Boden Artillery Regiment (A 8), in Boden
81st Artillery Battalion (81. artilleribataljon)
Staff and logistic battery, three Archer batteries, sensor battery
82nd Artillery Battalion (82. artilleribataljon)
Staff and logistic battery, three Archer batteries, sensor battery
Bergslagen Artillery Regiment (A 9), in Kristinehamn
91st Artillery Battalion (91. artilleribataljonen - being raised)
Staff and logistic battery, three Archer batteries, sensor battery
92nd Artillery Battalion (92. artilleribataljonen - being raised)
Staff and logistic battery, three Archer batteries, sensor battery
Göta Engineer Regiment (Ing 2), in Eksjö
21st Engineer Battalion (21. ingenjörbataljon)
Staff and logistic company, two engineer companies, machine/bridging company
22nd Engineer Battalion (22. ingenjörbataljon)
Staff and logistic company, two engineer companies, machine/bridging company
Air Defence Regiment (Lv 6), in Halmstad
61st Air Defence Battalion (61. luftvärnsbataljonen)
62nd Air Defence Battalion (62. luftvärnsbataljonen)
Göta Logistic Regiment (T 2), in Skövde
1st Logistic Battalion (1. logistikbataljonen)
2nd Logistic Battalion (2. logistikbataljonen)
1st Medical Reinforcement Company (1. sjukvårdsförstärkningskompaniet)
2nd Medical Reinforcement Company (2. sjukvårdsförstärkningskompaniet)
1st Traffic and Movement Control Company (1. trafik- och transportledningskompaniet)
The following Armed Forces' establishments provide additional units for the Rapid Reaction Organisation:

Command Regiment (LedR), in Enköping
Command Battalion (Ledningsplatsbataljonen)
Three Staff companies, public affairs/ interpreter/ combat camera company
Signal Battalion (Sambandsbataljonen)
Staff company, two signal companies, signal reinforcement company
Electronic Warfare Battalion (Telekrigsbataljonen)
Psychological Operations (Psykologiska operationer)
Meteorology and Oceanography Center (Meteorologi- och oceanograficentrum)
Armed Forces Centre for Defence Medicine, in Gothenburg
1st Hospital Company (1. sjukhuskompaniet)
2nd Hospital Company (2. sjukhuskompaniet)
National CBRN Defence Centre (SkyddC), in Umeå
1st CBRN defence Company (1. CBRN-kompaniet)
Armed Forces Technical School, in Halmstad
1st Operational Logistics Battalion (1. Operativa logistikbataljon)


=== Graphic overview of operational formations 2022 ===


== Equipment ==


== Home Guard ==
The Home Guard consists of 40 battalions with a total of 22,000 men. Many of the soldiers have served abroad with regular army units.


=== Northern Military Region ===

The Northern Military Region is responsible for supporting Home Guard units in, Jämtland County, Norrbotten County, Västerbotten County, and Västernorrland County with training and administrative resources.

Northern Military Region, in Boden
Lappland Jäger Group (Lapplandsjägargruppen – LJG), in Kiruna (Northern Norrbotten County)
Lappland Jäger Battalion (Lapplandsjägarbataljonen – 10. hvbat), in Kiruna
Frontier Jäger Battalion (Gränsjägarbataljonen – 11. hvbat), in Kalix
Norrbotten Group (Norrbottensgruppen – NBG), in Boden (Southern Norrbotten County)
Norrbotten Battalion (Norrbottensbataljonen – 12. hvbat), in Luleå
Västerbotten Group (Västerbottensgruppen – VBG), in Umeå (Västerbotten County)
Västerbotten Battalion (Västerbottensbataljonen – 13. hvbat), in Umeå
Field Jäger Group (Fältjägargruppen – FJG), in Östersund (Jämtland County)
Field Jäger Battalion (Fältjägarbataljonen – 14. hvbat), in Östersund
Västernorrland Group (Västernorrlandsgruppen – VNG), in Härnösand (Västernorrland County)
Ångermanland Battalion (Ångermanlandsbataljonen – 15. hvbat, Ångermanland province), in Örnsköldsvik
Medelpad Battalion (Medelpadsbataljonen – 16. hvbat, Medelpad province), in Sundsvall


=== Central Military Region ===

The Central Military Region is responsible for supporting Home Guard units in Dalarna County, Gävleborg County, Södermanland County, Stockholm County, Uppsala County, and Västmanland County with training and administrative resources.

Central Military Region, in Kungsängen
Dal Regiment Group (Dalregementsgruppen – DRG), in Falun (Dalarna County)
Dala Battalion (Dalabataljonen – 17. hvbat), in Falun
Gävleborg Group (Gävleborgsgruppen – GBG), in Gävle (Gävleborg County)
Gävleborg Battalion (Gävleborgsbataljonen – 18. hvbat), in Gävle
Uppland and Västmanland Group (Upplands- och Västmanlandsgruppen – UVG), in Enköping (Uppsala and Västmanland counties)
Uppland Battalion (Upplandsbataljonen – 21. hvbat), in Uppsala
Västmanland Battalion (Västmanlandsbataljonen – 22. hvbat), in Västerås
Life Guards Group (Livgardesgruppen – LGG), in Kungsängen (Stockholm County)
Attundaland Battalion (Attundalandsbataljonen – 23. hvbat), in Stockholm
Stockholm Battalion (Stockholmsbataljonen – 24. hvbat), in Stockholm
Telgehus Battalion (Telgehusbataljonen – 25. hvbat), in Södertälje
Ulvsunda Battalion (Ulvsundabataljonen – 26. hvbat), in Stockholm
Södermanland Group (Södermanlandsgruppen – SLG), in Strängnäs (Södermanland County)
Södermanland Battalion (Södermanlandsbataljonen – 27. hvbat), in Strängnäs
Södertörn Group (Södertörnsgruppen – UGS), at Berga Naval Base (Coastal areas of Stockholm County)
Roslagen Battalion (Roslagsbataljonen – 28. hvbat), in Norrtälje in Roslagen
Södertörn Battalion (Södertörnsbataljonen – 29. hvbat), at Berga Naval Base in Södertörn


=== Southern Military Region ===

The Southern Military Region is responsible for supporting Home Guard units in Blekinge County, Jönköping County, Kalmar County, Kronoberg County, Skåne County, and Östergötland County with training and administrative resources.

Southern Military Region, in Revingeby
Life Grenadier Group (Livgrenadjärgruppen – LGAG), in Linköping (Östergötland County)
1st Life Grenadier Battalion (Första livgrenadjärbataljonen – 30. hvbat), in Linköping
2nd Life Grenadier Battalion (Andra livgrenadjärbataljonen – 31. hvbat), in Norrköping
North Småland Group (Norra Smålandsgruppen – NSG), in Eksjö (Jönköping County)
North Småland Battalion (Norra Smålandsbataljonen – 33. hvbat), in Jönköping
Kalmar and Kronoberg Group (Kalmar- och Kronobergsgruppen – KRAG), in Växjö (Kalmar and Kronoberg counties)
Kalmar Battalion (Kalmarbataljonen – 34. hvbat), in Kalmar
Kronoberg Battalion (Kronobergsbataljonen – 35. hvbat), in Växjö
Blekinge Group (Blekingegruppen – BLG), in Karlskrona (Blekinge County)
Blekinge Western Battalion (Blekinge västra bataljon – 36. hvbat), in Ronneby
Blekinge Eastern Battalion (Blekinge östra bataljon – 37. hvbat), in Karlskrona
Scanian Group (Skånska gruppen – SSK), in Revingeby (Skåne County)
South Scanian Battalion (Södra skånska bataljonen – 46. hvbat), in Lund
Malmöhus Battalion (Malmöhusbataljonen – 47. hvbat), in Malmö (Malmöhus County)
Scanian Dragoon Battalion (Skånska dragonbataljonen – 48. hvbat), in Helsingborg
North Scanian Battalion (Norra skånska bataljonen – 49. hvbat), in Kristianstad


=== Western Military Region ===

The Western Military Region is responsible for supporting Home Guard units in Halland County, Värmland County, Västra Götaland County, and Örebro County with training and administrative resources.

Western Military Region, in Skövde
Örebro and Värmland Group (Örebro- och Värmlandsgruppen – ÖVG), in Örebro (Örebro and Värmland counties)
Värmland Battalion (Värmlandsbataljonen – 19. hvbat), in Karlstad
Sannahed Battalion (Sannahedsbataljonen – 20. hvbat), in Örebro
Skaraborg Group (Skaraborgsgruppen – SKG), in Skövde (Västra Götaland County)
Kinne Battalion (Kinnebataljonen – 38. hvbat), in Lidköping
Kåkind Battalion (Kåkindbataljonen – 39. hvbat), in Skövde
Bohusdal Group (Bohusdalgruppen – BDG), in Skredsvik (Bohuslän and Dalsland provinces)
Bohus Battalion (Bohusbataljonen – 40. hvbat), in Uddevalla
Elfsborg Group (Elfsborgsgruppen – EBG), in Käringberget (City of Gothenburg)
Gothenburg Southern Battalion (Göteborgs södra bataljon – 41. hvbat), in Gothenburg
Gothenburg Northern Battalion (Göteborgs norra bataljon – 42. hvbat), in Gothenburg
Gothenburg Archipelago Battalion (Göteborgs skärgårds bataljon – 43. hvbat), in Gothenburg
Älvsborg Battalion (Älvsborgsbataljonen – 44. hvbat), in Borås
Halland Group (Hallandsgruppen – HAG), in Halmstad (Halland County)
Halland Battalion (Hallandsbataljonen – 45. hvbat), in Halmstad


=== Gotland Military Region ===
The Home Guard battalion on the island of Gotland falls under the Gotland Regiment, which also commands the active 181st Armored Battalion.

Militärregion Gotland, in Visby
Gotland Regiment (P 18), in Visby
Gotland Group (Gotlandsgruppen – GLG), in Visby
Gotland Battalion (Gotlandsbataljonen – 32. hvbat), in Visby


== Size ==

The army on active service during most of the 20th century only consisted of conscript receiving their basic training (at the most one year for privates), and conscripts called up for refreshers (at the most one month for privates) with intervals of at least 4–6 years. During WWII smaller or larger parts of the wartime establishment were also called up for periodical stand-by duty (up to 6 months). The figures for total strength below refer to the total force which could be mobilised.
Between the introduction of universal conscription in 1902 until the start of World War II, the army was usually maintained at a consistent strength of 100,000 men, with two-thirds of the force being conscripts for two years. From 1942 onwards, the Swedish government embarked upon a massive and ambitious militarisation program in which conscription was strictly enforced and compulsory service was extended. The basic training for privates was set at 12 months, for future conscript sergeants intended to become platoon leaders (mainly sixth form graduates) 18 months, and for future conscript officers 24 months. These periods were gradually reduced, and the ranks were raised, until it was the same period for all conscripts shortly before conscription was suspended in 2009. This combined with propaganda about conscription being a part of social duty and defending the Swedish principle of folkhemmet, led to an army a size of about 700,000 active duty soldiers that could be mobilised in late 1945. Since the late winter of 1945 the size of the army was slowly decreased as entire reserve battalions and brigades were gradually demobilised, and by late 1947 the size of the army was around 170,000 soldiers who could be mobilised and was planned to stabilise at such a quantity of personnel.
However, due to the rise in tensions between the East and West over the political landscape of Europe, the threat from the Soviet Union in 1949 and 1950, coinciding with the start of the Cold War, led to a return to the militaristic policy by the Swedish government. From 1950 until around 1976 the size of the army was at an average of 250,000 soldiers with a peak of 400,000 mobilisable soldiers during the late 1950s and early 1960s. The rules were badly enforced, but dodging the draft was punishable with imprisonment.
During the 1980s the size of the army was around 180,000 soldiers and was slowly increased as time progressed until around 1988. The end of the Cold War led to a massive restructuring of the Swedish Army. Every year after 1988, the Army discharged around 40,000 conscripts and recruited only 20,000, so that by 1995 the size was down to 80,000 soldiers. Around this time the compulsory service obligation was further reduced to 10 months, reserve service became more flexible, and changes made in enforcement so that forceful enforcement became withdrawn as policy. By 2004 the size of the Swedish Army was down to 60,000 soldiers, and in 2013, three years after the end of conscription, the size was at an all-time low of just 16,000 soldiers, though the army plans to reach a level of 50,000 professional soldiers by 2020, mostly through a large media campaigns. A number of previously disbanded regiments will also be re-raised (Dalarna Regiment, Västernorrland Regiment, Norrland Dragoon Regiment, and Bergslagen Artillery Regiment) with the Jämtland Ranger Regiment re-raised as a battalion of Västernorrland Regiment.


== Recruitment ==
From the 17th century until 1901, Swedish Army recruitment was based upon the allotment system. In 1812, conscription was introduced for all males between age 20 and 25 to serve in the armed forces twelve days a year, increased in 1858 to four weeks per two years. The allotment system was abolished in 1901 and replaced with universal conscription for all males. All personnel were drafted as conscripts for a year of conscription, after which the unit the soldier trained with was put in reserve. Upon completion of conscript service with sufficient service marks, conscripts are eligible to apply for commissioned officer training, NCO/Warrant Officer or from 2007 stay in the Army as a professional private, mainly to be employed in the Nordic Battle Group. The army has employed soldiers for UN service on short time contracts since the 1950s for service abroad.
From July 2010 until 2017, the Swedish Army was an all-professional fighting force. The government announced on 2 March 2017 that conscription was going to be reinstated. Of a pool of around 13,000 men and women born 1999, 4,000 were going to be selected for conscription starting January 2018. The government stated that the number of conscripts may increase in response to foreign events.


== Ranks ==

Commissioned officer ranks
The rank insignia of commissioned officers.

Other ranks
The rank insignia of non-commissioned officers and enlisted personnel.


== See also ==
Military ranks of the Swedish Armed Forces
Royal Swedish Academy of War Sciences
Swedish Army Museum
List of wars involving Sweden
List of Swedish field marshals
Military district (Sweden)
List of Swedish military commanders
List of Swedish regiments
List of military aircraft of Sweden
Allotment system
List of equipment of the Swedish Army
Swedish military uniforms
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
Swedish intervention in Persia


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Swedish Army at Wikimedia Commons
Official website (in English)
Soldf.com – unofficial weapons, vehicles and equipment page of the Swedish Armed forces
Nordic military vehicles site
Scandinavian Armour by Roy Haaland
Svante Wendel's Unofficial Swedish Army Page