The Center for Arts in Natick, also known as TCAN (pronounced tee-can) in Natick, Massachusetts, is a regional community arts organization serving the cities and towns of MetroWest Boston. It has been in existence in various locations since 1997. The organization presents more than 300 events, classes and performances annually attended by over 28,000 patrons. TCAN was established as a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization in 1997.


== History ==
In 1997, founding director Michael Moran envisioned a coffeehouse venue in Natick Center, serving as a center of cultural and social interaction and an informal club for artists and regular members. Leasing a small storefront at 31 Main Street in Natick Center with a seating capacity of 60 patrons, TCAN hosted frequent open mic programs for local songwriters, a weekly jazz jam, small community theatre productions and visual art exhibits by local artists. In time more programs were added including a regular all-ages rock concert featuring teen bands, a classical music series and family performances for young children. The organization relied extensively on volunteers to provide staffing for events and drive marketing/fundraising activities.


== Relocation to Natick Central Fire Station ==
The success of TCAN in its original location encouraged the organization to seek a larger and more permanent facility. After considering alternate locations, TCAN purchased the historic Central Fire Station from the Town of Natick in October 1998. Originally constructed in 1875 following a devastating fire in 1874, the Central Fire Station is located in the heart of Natick Center and is recognized in the National Register of Historic Places.
A $2.5M restoration of the building included installation of a steel beam to allow use of 4,000 sq. ft. for the main performance space, reconstruction of the historic cupola that sits atop the hose drying tower, restoration of windows and masonry, installation of a new roof, and the return of the modified two double-bay entrances to the original four arched bays, complete with opening wood doors. The new TCAN facility, with four times as much seating capacity (270 seats), was opened as a performing arts center in May 2003.


== Management and Volunteers ==
In March 2004, shortly after relocation to the larger venue, TCAN's Board of Directors hired David Lavalley as its new executive director. The decision to part ways with founding director Michael Moran was met with local controversy and the departure of some volunteers, who protested his termination.
TCAN is governed by an elected volunteer Board of Directors, run by a staff of full-time and part-time employees and supported by over 175 volunteers. TCAN relies on volunteers to produce events, staff its box office and support all facets of marketing, fundraising and operations.


== Mission and Programs ==
TCAN is unique in providing a wide variety of programming, ranging from nationally known touring musicians to local performers, theatre, comedy, arts education classes and family programs.
Featured Performances - Concerts feature well-known touring musicians and bands spanning folk, blues, contemporary, rock, jazz, fusion and classical music. See List of Notable Performances.
Art House Cinema - The TCAN Screening Room, a 120-seat digital cinema venue, was added in a 2016 renovation. Screenings of classic films and new releases are held weekly including feature films, documentaries and classic movies.
TCAN Players - TCAN is home to its own community theatre troupe, who present three productions each year. Auditions are open to the public. TCAN Players, including their productions, cast and crew have been nominated and received DASH awards by the Eastern Massachusetts Association of Community Theatres.
Folk Open Mic - An Open Mic event for singer-songwriters and musicians of all genres.
Young Masters Series - A classical music series dedicated to presenting talented young classical musicians from around the world.


== Strategic Partnerships ==
TCAN has initiated strategic partnerships to strengthen programming and expand its audience.
In 2008, TCAN and the Danforth Museum in Framingham, Massachusetts, announced a strategic partnership to  enhance program offerings and benefits for members of their respective organizations.
In 2013, TCAN and the Walnut Hill School in Natick, Massachusetts, announced a partnership to share resources, facilities and expertise to advance their respective missions, enhance the Natick Center Cultural District, while also creating long-term sustainability for each organization.
In partnership with Natick Service Council, South Middlesex Opportunities Council and United Way of TriCounty, TCAN offers a program called Smile in Every Seat that provides free access to TCAN's programming for economically disadvantaged people and families in Natick and surrounding communities.
Since 2012, TCAN has collaborated with The Verve Boston Natick, a hotel in the Tapestry Collection by Hilton Worldwide, to produce live music events in their Route 9 Natick location. These concerts have presented artists including Eddie Money, Loverboy, 10,000 Maniacs, The Smithereens, Lisa Marie Presley, Vertical Horizon, The Tubes and other national touring artists.
In 2021, TCAN presented its first outdoor live music event in a partnership with Belkin Family Lookout Farm in South Natick, featuring the group Carbon Leaf from Richmond, VA.


== List of Notable Performances ==
TCAN has featured thousands of performances on its stage, below is a partial list of artists who have performed at TCAN representing a variety of genres.
Artists inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame are recognized with an asterisk (*).


== Awards and Grants ==
TCAN has been recognized with a number of grants and awards, including the following:

2005 - Massachusetts Historical Commission - Preservation Award for Adaptive Reuse
2005 - Natick Cultural Council - Certificate of Achievement
2006 - Natick Historical Commission - 2006 Preservation Award
2011 - Massachusetts General Court - Certificate of Recognition, Classical Music Series
2014 - Massachusetts Cultural Council - Cultural Facility Fund Grant
2016 - Natick Education Foundation - Shining Light Award, Community Business
2020 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Place To See a Concert
2020 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Live Theater
2021 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Live Theater (finalist)
2021 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Place To See a Concert (finalist)
2022 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Live Music/Concert Venue
2022 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Nonprofit/Charity Organization
2022 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Live Theater (finalist)
2022 - MetroWest Daily News - Best Tourist/Seasonal Attraction - Local (finalist)
In 2009 CNNMoney.com named Natick, Massachusetts #8 in its list of Best Places for a Healthy Retirement, citing The Center for Arts in Natick and Natick Mall as key amenities.
Natick Center in Natick, Massachusetts, was awarded the designation of Cultural District by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 2012. TCAN and the Morse Institute Library were recognized as the cultural anchors of the District.


== Other Facts of Interest ==
The hose drying tower of the firehouse was originally used to hang canvas fire hoses after use, slowing the deterioration caused if the hoses were not dried thoroughly. The tower is now topped by a replica of the original cupola, designed and constructed in 2006 entirely by a group of volunteers led by Ken Soderholm and Jay Ball. The cupola was built from materials donated by local businesses.
Several performing artists have released recordings of live performances at TCAN. These include the following recordings:

Scenes included in the 2013 American drama film Labor Day (film) starring Kate Winslet, Josh Brolin and Tobey Maguire were filmed in The Center for Arts in Natick.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Center for Arts in Natick website
TCAN Players Community Theatre website
TCAN volunteers construct a cupola - YouTube