Journey to the Center of the Earth (released in the UK as Journey to Middle Earth) is a 2008 American science fiction action adventure film created by The Asylum and directed by David Jones and Scott Wheeler.
The film is a loose adaptation of the original 1864 novel Journey to the Center of the Earth by Jules Verne, but bears a close similarity to At the Earth's Core, a similar 1914 novel by Edgar Rice Burroughs. It is also the second film by The Asylum to be based on a Jules Verne novel, the first being 30,000 Leagues Under the Sea. A mockbuster, it was released to capitalize on the higher-budgeted film of the same title starring Brendan Fraser.


== Plot ==
The film follows two intertwined subplots: a drilling operation that is taking place in South America, and a rescue mission to save a research team that has been teleported 600 km beneath the Earth's crust.
The drill, a fully Argentinian project, is powerful enough to send miniature drills through solid rock at a fast pace and is used to try to rescue the team from their fate. The operation begins, but the drills accidentally break through the Earth's crust and into the very mantle of the Earth. This is where the operators encounter hidden dangers awaiting them at the Earth's core. The team has to deal with prehistoric creatures in order to both save the research team and to return safely to the surface of the Earth.


== Cast ==
Greg Evigan as Joseph Harnet
Dedee Pfeiffer as Emily Radford
Vanessa Lee Evigan as Victoria Jansen
Caroline Attwood as Gretchen Lake
Amelia Jackson-Gray as Kate Burroughs
Sara Tomko as Betsey Case
Vanessa Mitchell as Eve Abraham
Michael Tower as Marty


== See also ==
Kola Superdeep Borehole, The deepest hole ever actually drilled into the Earth's crust
Viaje al centro de la Tierra, Spanish adventure film based on Journey to the Center of the Earth by Jules Verne.


== References ==


== External links ==
Journey to the Center of the Earth at The Asylum
Journey to the Center of the Earth at IMDb
Journey to the Center of the Earth official trailer on YouTube
Journey to the Center of the Earth at AllMovie
Journey to the Center of the Earth at the TCM Movie Database