The School of Hotel and Tourism Management (SHTM) is one of the schools at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU). It was established in 1979 as the Department of Institutional Management and Catering Studies, then renamed as Department of Hotel and Tourism Management in 1992. The department was designated a school in October 2001, which became an independent autonomous academic unit within the university structure in July 2004.
The SHTM offers programmes from undergraduate degrees to doctoral degrees. In 2012, the SHTM received the McCool Breakthrough Award from the International Council on Hotel, Restaurant, and Institutional Education (I-CHRIE) for its teaching and research hotel, Hotel ICON. The School is currently an Affiliate Member of the United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO).


== Programmes ==
The SHTM offers programmes at levels ranging from Bachelor’s degree to Ph.D. in Hong Kong and Mainland China:
 Programmes in Hong Kong

Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) in Hotel and Tourism Management
Doctor of Hotel and Tourism Management (D.HTM)
Master of Science (MSc) in Global Hospitality Business
MSc Scheme in Hospitality and Tourism Management
MSc in Innovation and Entrepreneurship in Hospitality
MSc in International Hospitality Management
MSc in International Tourism and Convention Management
MSc in International Wine Management
MSc in Luxury Experiences Management
MicroMasters in International Hospitality Management (online programme)
Bachelor of Science (Hons) Scheme in Hotel and Tourism Management
 Programmes in Mainland China

Doctor of Hotel and Tourism Management (D.HTM) (in cooperation with Zhejiang University)
Master of Science (MSc) in Hotel and Tourism Management (in cooperation with Zhejiang University)


== Facilities ==
Hotel ICON

Officially opened on 21 September 2011, Hotel ICON (唯港薈) is the teaching and research hotel built for the SHTM by PolyU. It was built on the site of Pak Sui Yuen (百粹苑), the former PolyU's staff quarters. Wholly owned by PolyU and an extension of the SHTM, Hotel ICON has a total of 262 guestrooms including three dedicated "Tomorrow's Guestrooms" reserved for innovations and advance research.
Mr. and Mrs. Chan Chak Fu Building
The building that houses the School was named after the late Mr. and Mrs. Chan Chak Fu, a pioneer Hong Kong hotelier, in appreciation for the contributions by Seal of Love Charitable Foundation Limited to support PolyU's development and advancement in hospitality and tourism education and research.
Gallery of Honour
Located in the SHTM lobby, the Gallery of Honour displays portraits of the recipients of the SHTM Lifetime Achievement Award. The School established this award to honor individuals who have contributed substantially to the development of hospitality and tourism in Hong Kong, Asia, and the world.

SHTM Lifetime Achievement Award Recipients
2016 – Mr. Adrian Zecha, Founder of Aman Resorts
2017 – The Honourable Sir Michael Kadoorie, Chairman of The Hong Kong and Shanghai Hotels Limited and Chairman of CLP Holdings Limited
2018 – Thanpuying Chanut Piyaoui, Founder and Honorary Chairman of Dusit International
2019 – Mr. P. R. S. Oberoi, Executive Chairman of EIH Limited, the flagship company of The Oberoi Group
2020 – Mr. Robert H. Burns, Founder of Regent International Hotels
2023 – Dr. Ho Kwon Ping, Founder and Executive Chairman of Banyan Tree Holdings and Laguna Resorts and Hotels

Che-woo Lui Hotel and Tourism Resource Centre
Designed to support the research, teaching and learning functions of the SHTM, the Che-woo Lui Hotel and Tourism Resource Centre  is a repository of reference and teaching materials in hotel and tourism management subject areas. It is also equipped with facilities for student discussion, group projects and seminars.
Tan Siu Lin Innovation Hub
Bistro 1979
Bistro 1979  is a student-operated restaurant providing a restaurant setting for SHTM students to learn and experience the actual food and beverage management and operation. The restaurant has a capacity of 66 people and includes main and exclusive dining areas for its members and guests.
Vinoteca Lab
Vinoteca Lab is a wine lab used for a variety of classes ranging from basic wine fundamentals to advanced regional and international wine knowledge and specialist skills. It also hosts a variety of other classes, including wine appreciation, food and wine pairing, creative mixology, and coffee art, which are open to students, industry representatives, and the general public. Workshops organized by the Food and Wine Academy, an initiative by the SHTM and Hotel ICON, take place in this lab.
The Food and Wine Academy
The Food and Wine Academy is a joint initiative of the SHTM and Hotel ICON, offering series of short, jointly developed workshops and courses for food and wine enthusiasts, ranging from basic to advanced levels. 
The Western Food Production Lab
The Western Food Production Lab allows students to practice and learn about food production, food hygiene and safety. Workshops organized by the Food and Wine Academy also take place here.


== Research and Consultancies ==
Hospitality and Tourism Research Centre
Established by the SHTM, the Hospitality and Tourism Research Centre is a research-based platform. It supports academic research.
The SHTM+ICON Consultancy
SHTM+ICON Consultancy is a business unit under the auspices of the PolyU Technology & Consultancy Co. Ltd. (PTeC), which is a wholly-owned subsidiary of PolyU. The services offered include: Hospitality Management, Hospitality Development, Executive Education in Hospitality and Other Service Industries, and Higher Education in Hospitality.


== References ==