Blindfolded Eyes (Spanish: Los ojos vendados) is a 1978 Spanish drama film directed by Carlos Saura. It was entered into the 1978 Cannes Film Festival.


== Plot ==
An executive director makes an impassioned speech before a tribunal, pleading for the release of world prisoners held in death camps based on verified testimonial evidence. He steps aside, and allows Inés, a former torture victim, to give her testimony. Moved by the speech, Luis, an acting instructor, writes a theatrical play about the victims of political repression and torture. He arrives at the residence of his friend, Emilia, who is married to her husband Manuel. There, she tells Luis about her intentions to become an actress. He invites her to study at his drama studio. While Luis is at the dentist, he sees a vision of three men apprehending Emilia and having her blindfolded in the back of a vehicle. 
Under immense pressure by the Spanish government, Luis struggles to sleep. He arrives at his desk and uncrumples a threatening letter demanding that he abandon the play. The next day, Emilia arrives at Luis's drama school and instructs her and his students to work on their body performance in their acting. When the class is over, Luis complains of a renal colic, and parks his vehicle in a country field. He makes a plea wishing to die, and is later assisted by a couple driving down the road. Back at his studio, Luis instructs his students to derive emotional memories from their past to improve their acting. 
At his residence, Luis receives another threatening letter. He soon answers the door, and finds Emilia who tells him that Manuel had struck her. She and Manuel had fell into an argument complaining about Emilia's absences from home and mocking her acting pursuits. Deciding she will never return to Manuel, Emilia and Luis develop a romantic attraction and live together. Sometime later, Luis visits his uncle Andrés, who sells coal in his cellar. During his childhood, Luis had worked for his uncle after his father died and the family business went under. After arriving at Andrés's suite, Luis reflects being caught writing a short poem about mediating on the meaning of life. With his uncle's permission, Luis ventures into the coal cellar. 
At his studio, Luis casts Emilia in the lead role of his play. On their drive home, Luis returns to the same country field and positions himself in a death-like state. While Emilia is rehearsing her part, she dreams of herself being tortured and blindfolded. Rehearsals continue as Emilia reads her part as the torture victim; meanwhile, Luis receives his final threatening letter. Soon after, Emilia returns to Luis's apartment where it has been vandalized and ransacked. Luis has been brutally beaten but is still conscious. Emilia immediately contacts emergency and Luis is rushed to the hospital. 
The film returns to Inés concluding her testimony until she is shot dead by government assassins. Luis and other members of the tribunals are also shot, as the audience flees in terror. The camera then reveals that the speaker has been Emilia. 


== Cast ==
Geraldine Chaplin as Emilia Spencer
José Luis Gómez as Luis López Ciagar
Xabier Elorriaga as Manuel
Lola Cardona as La tía
André Falcon as Abogado
Manuel Guitián as El tío
Carmen Maura as La enfermera
Fabienae Molière
Judith Cuquele Tarasiuk
Dominique Lestournel


== References ==


== External links ==
Blindfolded Eyes at IMDb
Blindfolded Eyes at AllMovie
Blindfolded Eyes at the TCM Movie Database