Mohammad Saiful Alam is a retired lieutenant general in the Bangladesh Army. His last posting was as the ambassador at Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Earlier, he was the Commandant of National Defence College, Bangladesh. He served as the Quarter Master General (QMG) of the Bangladesh Army in Army Headquarters. He was one of the former director general of the Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI). He also served as general officer commanding (GOC), 11 Infantry Division and Area Commander, Bogura Area.


== Early life ==
Saiful Alam was born in Gopalganj. He has passed his SSC and HSC from Jhenidah Cadet College in 1982 and 1984 respectively.


== Career ==
Alam was commissioned on 27 June 1986 in the 14th Bangladesh Military Academy Long Course. He won the Sword of Honour and Academic Gold Medal in his BMA long course. He has commanded an infantry brigade under 11th Infantry Division. After serving as the general officer commanding of 11th Infantry Division and area commander, Bogura Area in Bogra Cantonment, he was appointed as Director General of Directorate General of Forces Intelligence (DGFI) on 28 February 2020. Prior to his duties in Bogra, he was the general officer commanding (GOC) of 7th Infantry Division and area commander of Barishal Area, Barisal Sheikh Hasina cantonment. He served as the Directing Staff of Defence Services Command & Staff College, Mirpur. He also served as the Commandant of the Bangladesh Military Academy (BMA) and School of Infantry & Tactics (SI&T). He was a Platoon Commander in Bangladesh Military Academy (BMA).
On 5 July 2021, Alam was appointed the Quarter Master General of Bangladesh Army in Army Headquarters .
On 29 January 2024, he was appointed as the Commandant of National Defence College (NDC), Bangladesh. In August 2024, he was posted to Ministry of Foreign Affairs. On 3 September 2024 his bank account has been seized by Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU) of Bangladesh Bank. At the same time, the account in the name of his wife and children and the bank account of the business owned by them have also been asked to be suspended. On 11 September 2024 he was sent into Mandatory retirement. Two former director generals of Directorate-General of Forces Intelligence, Major general Hamidul Haque, and Lieutenant general Ahmed Tabrez Shams Chowdhury, were also sent into forced retirement with him.


== References ==