"Martsa ng Taguig" (Filipino for "Taguig March"), also known as "Awit ng Bayang Taguig (Martsa)" ("The Song of Taguig (March)"), and generally referred to as the Taguig Hymn, is the official anthem of the city of Taguig in the Philippines.


== History ==
During the tenure of the former municipal mayor Rodolfo de Guzman, he suggested to several local officials including Councilor Mario Reyes of Barangay Calzada and Councilor Dr. Rene Labuntog of Signal Village that Taguig must have an official hymn.
Subsequently, a meeting was held on May 12, 1989, between Mayor de Guzman and the officers and members of Banda-1 Tipas Foundation, Inc. led by its president, Felipe C. Santos, vice-president Engr. Danilo Dueñas, advisor BIR Deputy Commissioner Eufracio Santos, members of the Board of Directors Engr. Ricardo Natividad, Resty Mañosca, Ador Estacio, Noli Lagkalinawan, Francisco Mariano, Venancio Cruz, Jacinto Herrera, Brigido Manalo and coordinator Charlie Prophet, to inspire the plan to create the Hymn and Song of Taguig.
In order to accomplish this more, the group approached Lt. Col. Demetrio E. De Jesus, the then-leader and conductor of the Philippine Constabulary Band for the music and Victoriano R. Dimaguila for the lyrics. There was also a consultation with National Artist Lucio San Pedro to ask for a comment on the created song.
On March 28, 1990, during a gathering at the grounds of the Taguig Town Government, Santos formally presented the anthem and hymn's music sheet to de Guzman. Following this, the anthem was heard for the first time to the public, as being sung by the Metro Manila Commission Choir Group, accompanied by the Banda 1 Tipas Foundation.
On July 26, 2016, De Jesus' original music sheet of the anthem and hymn was given to Taguig Heritage Society during its exhibit in Plaza Quezon in Brgy. Sta Ana for safe custody of THS and is destined to be housed when the Taguig City Museum is built.
De Jesus and Dimaguila were honored and recognized by mayor Lani Cayetano on October 3, 2022, as outstanding citizens of the city in their contribution.
On October 17, 2022, Councilor Gigi Valenzuela De Mesa filed City Resolution No. 31 s. 2022 in the City Council that the anthem is recognized as the Official Hymn of the City of Taguig and encouraged that this should be sung after Lupang Hinirang at all levels of public and private schools in Taguig and in the barangays and offices of the Taguig subjugated government during gatherings and flag raising ceremonies. The resolution would be later approved by all members of the city council led by vice-mayor Arvin Alit.
For the first time since the resolution on the adoption of the song as approved by the City Council, the song was sung at the start of the 18th Regular Session of the 7th City Council on November 7, 2022.


== Lyrics ==
The anthem's lyrics is to serve as inspiration and the love and appreciation for Taguig.


== References ==