Cherry Hill (1932-2024) is an English model engineer known for her detailed scale models of steam vehicles. Hill won the Duke of Edinburgh award nine times, the Bradbury Winter Memorial Trophy eight times, was awarded an MBE (Member of the British Empire) by the Queen of England, and other awards. 


== Life and work ==
Cherry Hill was born in Malvern, Worcestershire, England, in 1932. Her father was an agricultural machinery manufacturer who began mentoring her when she showed enthusiasm for metalworking. Hill is considered to be one of the greatest model engineers ever due to her success in competitions. During her 60-year career, Hill built nearly 20 detailed scale models of steam vehicles, including Victorian models, which each took her approximately 7,000 hours to make. The parts in the models are all made from her metal stock, and the engines are fully operational. 
An article written about her by the Craftsmanship Museum says that "The uncompromising craftsmanship exhibited in Cherry’s work is a result of her attitude. She never accepts anything less than perfection." As her career progressed past its early stages, Hill started building unusual models, many of which were insufficiently documented or had no existing original copies. Due to the scarce information, Hill had to get creative to make some models work that did not work originally. The models made at the beginning of Hill's career were given to family and friends, but her more recent ones have been donated to the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. She was married to Ivor Hill, also a model engineer, until his death and has lived in the U.S. since the 90s. She died in 2024.


== Awards ==
Sir Henry Royce Trophy for the Pursuit of Excellence (1989 and 1995).
MBE (Member of the British Empire) award (2000).
Elected Companion of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers (2004).
Honorary member of the Society of Model and Experimental Engineers (2004).
Awarded nine different gold medals at the annual Model Engineer Exhibition in London.
Awarded the Bradbury Winter Memorial Trophy eight times.
Awarded the Aveling Barford Cup twice.
Crebbin Memorial Trophy.
Awarded the Championship Cup three times.
Awarded The Duke of Edinburgh's Award nine times.
Joe Martin Foundation Craftsman of the Year Award (2017).


== References ==


== External links ==
The Remarkable Mechanical Models of Cherry Hill