Miles Ahead is the original motion picture soundtrack of the 2015 film of the same name. Released on April 1, 2016, the soundtrack features music by Miles Davis, Robert Glasper, and Taylor Eigsti, with dialogue tracks by Don Cheadle, Ewan McGregor, and Phil Schaap. Consisting of 24 tracks, the ranges of album's genre include jazz-instrumental, jazz-funk, trumpet jazz, modal music, hard bop, fusion and hiphop (on the closing track).
"Solea", "Seven Steps to Heaven", "Nefertiti", "Duran", "Black Satin", "Back Seat Betty", "So What", "Frelon brun", and "Go Ahead John (part two C)" are some of the most well-known songs on the album. There are four new compositions written/co-written by Glasper. The album stands as a double portrait of Davis, since the album consists of both contemporary songs of recent artists and the past original compositions of Davis. The album won the Grammy Award for "Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media" at 59th Annual Grammy Awards.


== Track listing ==


== Tracks that appeared in the film but not on the soundtrack album ==
"Inner Vice" – Written and performed by Robert Glasper
"Gone" – Written by Gil Evans and performed by Miles Davis
"Blue in Green" – Written and performed by Miles Davis
"Sanctuary" – Written by Wayne Shorter and performed by Miles Davis
"Teo" – Written and performed by Miles Davis
"Moja (Part 1)" – Written and performed by Miles Davis
"Moja (Part 2)" – Written and performed by Miles Davis
"East of the Rockfort Rock" – Performed by Sir Coxsone Sound
"Lowdown" – Written by Boz Scaggs and David Paich and performed by Boz Scaggs
"Getaway" – Written by Beloyd Taylor and Peter Cor, performed by Earth, Wind & Fire
"Blow the Horns" – Written and performed by Black Milk


== References ==
Colter Walls, Seth (28 May 2016). "Miles Ahead OST". Pitchfork. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
Randall, Mac (16 June 2016). "Miles Ahead: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". JazzTimes. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
Garratt, John (21 April 2016). "Miles Ahead Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". PopMatters. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
Walters, John (4 May 2016). "CD REVIEW: Miles Ahead - Original Motion Picture Soundtrack". London Jazz News. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
Hawbaker-Krohn, KT (31 March 2016). "The 'Miles Ahead' Soundtrack Is Perfect To Get You Out Of A Blue Mood". Bustle. Retrieved 16 December 2016.
Miles Ahead [Original Motion Picture Soundtrack] review at AllMusic by Thom Jurek (rating 3.5/5)
Miles Ahead (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) at Discogs (list of releases)
Soundtrack of Miles Ahead at IMDb