Kazakh invasion of Northern Bukhara also known as a Kazakh invasion of Mā Warāʾ an-Nahr was a military campaign of the Kazakh Khanate led by Tawakkul Khan against the Khanate of Bukhara in 1598 and 1599.


== Campaign ==
The invasion of the Khanate of Bukhara was the idea of the Kazakh Khan Tawakkul. Khan, who was an ally of the Bukharans for much of the 1580s and 1590s. News of Abdullah Khan II's death early in 1598, followed by the death of Abd al-Mu'min in June of that year, inspired by Tawakkul to assert himself.
Shortly before the death of Abdullah Khan II, Tawakkul Khan defeated the Uzbek army sent by Abdullah Khan II and captured the cities of Aksi and Andijan.
In the winter of 1598-1599, Tawakkul with the army of the Kazakh Khanate, which consisted of Kazakhs, Karakalpaks and Kyrgyz, moved south from Dasht-i Kipchak, in the direction of Transoxiana. First of all, he captured Tashkent and other settlements along it. The Syr Darya River and all the others fell without resistance. Then he moved forward. south towards Samarkand. Having learned about the approach of Tawakkul, the population of the city offered no resistance. They surrendered Samarkand to the Kazakhs and gave them their prince as a hostage.
Tawakkul remained briefly in Samarkand before heading west towards Dabusia and Bukhara. Khan left his brother Esim Sultan in Samarkand with a garrison of twenty thousand people to govern Samarkand and surrounding region.
Tawakkul Khan himself moved to besiege Bukhara with his army of 70-80,000 people. However, he was defeated in Bukhara, which was nominally under the rule of the last Shaybanid khan, Pir Muhammad Khan, and retreated to Tashkent, where he died after illness. Tawakkul's conquests were soon retaken by the Uzbeks, but Tashkent and Turkestan remained with the Kazakhs until 1723 (Barefooted Flight).


== Results ==
In 1598–1599, after a series of military campaigns, the Kazakh khans established control over Fergana and parts of Turkestan, including the Tashkent oasis. Fergana was returned at the beginning of the 17th century, and other lands acquired by the Kazakhs remained under their control. Treaties concluded between the Uzbeks and Kazakhs promised the Kazakhs that the Uzbek khans would not interfere in the affairs of the occupied lands.


== References ==