Jerome Patrick Flynn (born 16 March 1963) is an English actor and singer. He is best known for his role as Bronn in the HBO fantasy series Game of Thrones (2011–19). His other roles include Paddy Garvey of the King's Fusiliers in the ITV series Soldier Soldier (1991–95), Bennet Drake in the BBC mystery series Ripper Street (2012–16), Hector in the Black Mirror episode Shut Up and Dance (2016), and Banner Creighton in the Paramount+ western series 1923 (2022–present).
He and his Soldier Soldier co-star Robson Green also performed as Robson & Jerome in the latter half of the 1990s. They released a version of "Unchained Melody", which stayed at number 1 for 7 weeks on the UK Chart, selling more than a million copies and becoming the best-selling single of 1995. The duo had two further number 1 singles: "I Believe" and "What Becomes of the Brokenhearted". Their eponymous debut album and the follow-up Take Two both reached number 1 on the UK Albums Chart.


== Early life ==
Flynn was born on 16 March 1963, in Bromley, Kent, (now part of Greater London), the son of actor and singer Eric Flynn, who was born on Hainan Island in China, and drama teacher Fern Flynn. He has a brother, actor Daniel Flynn, a sister; and a half-sister and a half-brother, musician and actor Johnny Flynn, from his father's second marriage.


== Career ==
In 1986, Flynn appeared in the LWT television film London's Burning as firefighter Kenny "Rambo" Baines. When the film spawned a series of the same name in 1988, he was unable to reprise his role due to previous commitments. Also in 1986, he played a minor role as the soldier "Franny" in "The Monocled Mutineer". In 1988 he played the character Freddie in the ITV drama; The Fear, which was about the London underworld.  He appeared as D.S Eddie Hargreaves for six episodes of the British Academy Television Award (BAFTA) winning police drama, Between The Lines between 1992 and 1994.
Flynn portrayed Corporal Paddy Garvey of the King's Fusiliers, alongside Robson Green in the ITV series Soldier Soldier. After Flynn and Green performed Unchained Melody on the programme, ITV was inundated by people looking to buy the song, and the pair were persuaded by record producer Simon Cowell to record it and release it as a single, a double A-side with White Cliffs of Dover. The single was released under the name Robson & Jerome and reached number one in the UK chart in 1995. It stayed at No.1 for 7 weeks in the UK Singles Chart, selling more than 1.9 million copies, and making it the best-selling single of the year, and winning the duo the Music Week Awards in 1996 for best single and best album. The duo had two more number one hits in 1995 and 1996 with "I Believe" and "What Becomes of the Brokenhearted" both re-makes of standards, they also produced two number one albums.
In 1997, he starred as Eddie Wallis, alongside singing partner Robson Green, in the comedy-drama Ain't Misbehavin. In 1999, Flynn starred in the short-lived police show Badger, played real-life footballer Bobby Charlton in the film  Best, played Tommy Cooper in Jus' Like That, a tribute to the late comic, written by John Fisher and directed by Simon Callow.
In 2007, Flynn having semi-retired from acting and moved to Pembrokeshire, directed and starred in the low budget film Rude Tales. The film was split into a series of short stories centred in the lead character, Jerome Rude, played by Flynn. In July 2010, after almost 10 years away from acting, it was confirmed that Flynn would be playing the role of Bronn in the HBO television series Game of Thrones. He continued the role for nine years until 2019.
Flynn provides the voice of Daniel (the hound) in the children's television show Tommy Zoom. In 2012, Flynn stars alongside Matthew Macfadyen in four series of Ripper Street for the BBC.
In 2016,  Flynn appeared in "Shut Up and Dance", an episode of the anthology series Black Mirror. In 2017, he was the voice of Dr. Gachet in the film Loving Vincent.
In 2019, in an interview, Flynn revealed that he'd been cast in Amazon Prime Video's upcoming series adaptation of Stephen King's The Dark Tower series in an unannounced role.
In 2021, Flynn portrayed Neil Wallis specialist in crisis management in the BBC1 television drama film The Trick, based on the true story around Climategate. In 2022, he starred alongside Harrison Ford and Helen Mirren, where he played Scottish sheep farmer, Banner Creighton in Taylor Sheridan’s 1923 (TV series).
Flynn has narrated several Sleep Stories for the Calm App and is an advocate for Meditation and Mindfulness. Flynn acts as patron for the Mindfulness in Schools Project.


== Personal life ==
Vegetarian since the age of 18, Flynn is a patron of the Vegetarian Society and Compassion in World Farming. He has joined PETA in advocating the vegan lifestyle he himself lives by. In December 2018, Flynn joined the board of directors of VeganNation, an Israeli-based vegan lifestyle project that aims to create an ‘international vegan economy based on a virtual currency, the VeganCoin.” 
Having taken childhood holidays in Pembrokeshire, Wales with his family, as a then follower of Ratu Bagus, a form of meditation, Flynn and some friends moved to a Georgian house there in the late 1990s, where he still lived in 2014.
Flynn was in a brief relationship with Game of Thrones co-star Lena Headey, which ended in 2014. 


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Jerome Flynn at IMDb