The Erez Crossing bombing was a Palestinian suicide bombing which occurred on January 14, 2004, at the pedestrian/cargo terminal Erez Crossing located on the Israeli Gaza Strip barrier. Four Israelis were killed and 10 people, including four Palestinians, were injured in the attack.
Hamas and the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed joint responsibility for the attack.


== The attack ==
On Wednesday, 14 January 2004, around 9:30 am, a female Palestinian suicide bomber, approached the pedestrian/cargo terminal Erez Crossing (the main crossing point between Israel and the Gaza Strip where Israeli security forces tend to perform routine security checks to the Palestinian workers before they are allowed to enter Israel).
The suicide bomber was faking a limp and she told the security guards at the site that she had a metal plate in her leg which would most likely trigger the alarm. As a result, a female soldier was sent to check her. As the suicide bomber was waiting for the arrival of the female soldier, she managed to infiltrate into the inspection hall, and detonated the hidden explosive device which was concealed on her body.
Three soldiers and one civilian employee of the Erez crossing were killed in the attack. 10 people, including four Palestinians, were injured in the attack.


== Victims ==
Staff Sergeant Tzur Or, 20, of Rishon Lezion
Corporal Andrei Kegeles, 19, of Nahariya
Gal Shapira, 29, of Ashkelon
Staff Sergeant Vladimir Trostinsky, 22, of Rehovot


== Perpetrators ==
Hamas and the Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigades claimed joint responsibility for the attack. Hamas spokesman stated that the suicide bomber was a 22-year-old Palestinian mother of two from Gaza named Reem al-Reyashi. After the attack, a video of al-Reyashi, which was filmed before the attack, was published in which she was wearing combat fatigues and holding an automatic rifle with a rocket-propelled grenade in the foreground. In the video, she states that she dreamt of "turning my body into deadly shrapnel against the Zionists" since the age of 13  and that she "always wanted to be the first woman to carry out a martyrdom operation, where parts of my body can fly all over and "knocking the door of heaven"."
Hamas founder Sheikh Ahmed Yassin stated in an interview with the Reuters news agency that "The fact that a woman took part for the first time in a Hamas operation marks a significant evolution".


== See also ==
Female suicide bomber
Wafa al Bass
List of terrorist incidents, 2004


== External links ==
Female suicide bomber kills at least 4 Israelis - published on CNN on January 14, 2004
Gaza attack kills four Israelis - published on BBC News on January 14, 2004
Female suicide bomber kills four - published on The Age on January 15, 2004
'I always wanted to be first woman martyr' - published on Independent Online on January 15, 2004
Woman bomber kills four in Israel - published on The Daily Telegraph on January 14, 2004


== References ==