Akbar Pray (born Wayne B. Pray on March 22, 1948) is an American writer, columnist and convicted  drug kingpin from Newark, New Jersey who was serving a life sentence in federal prison, imposed in 1990, before obtaining a "compassionate release" on September 30, 2024.
Pray headed operations that distributed millions of dollars worth of cocaine and marijuana into Essex County, New Jersey from the early 1970s to the late 1980s.
The Pray organization called itself The Family, and consisted of more than 300 active members. In addition to its drug distribution networks, the group had been active in real estate ventures.
Once described as "untouchable" by law enforcement, Pray was indicted in the District of New Jersey under the federal Continuing Criminal Enterprise ("super-kingpin") statute, tried for seven months and convicted by a jury. He was sentenced by Judge John Bissell to a mandatory term of life without possibility of parole in 1990.


== Criminal career ==
Pray was born in Newark in 1948.  Starting off as a street hustler, was soon operating a major drug ring.


== Arrest and conviction ==
On June 21, 1988, Pray and four subordinates were indicted under the federal drug kingpin statute. He was arrested in Boca Raton, Florida by federal authorities, accused of leading an organized cocaine and marijuana trafficking enterprise. Federal officials estimated that his organization distributed 341 kilos of cocaine and 354 kilos of marijuana in less than two years, grossing more than $4.5 million annually.
Pray traveled throughout the United States, making deals and arranging for transportation of narcotics. He also traveled to Colombia and the West Indies to purchase his supply of cocaine.
His seven-month trial consisted of the testimony of 126 "document" witnesses, being hotel staff, car salesmen and retail clothing store employees, all solicited to testify to Pray's extravagant spending and lifestyle, as part of the prosecution's "substantial wealth" case against him. This ideology behind the case was that Pray made and spent copious amounts of money, far more than could be accounted for by legitimate means.
On January 12, 1990, Pray was sentenced under the federal drug kingpin statute to life in prison without parole.
Pray was serving his life sentence at FMC Butner, a medical prison facility in Butner, North Carolina.  With the assistance of attorneys Peter Goldberger and Isaac Wright Jr., Pray obtained a sentence reduction to time served (more than 36 years) from Judge Claire Cecchi under the "compassionate release" provision of the First Step Act. Pray was released on September 30, 2024.


== Prison activities ==
In prison, Pray wrote the book "The Death of the Game", which warns youth of the detrimental realities associated with the street life. He is also a columnist and regular contributor to Don Diva magazine, a contributing writer to Nikki Turner's "Tales From Da Hood" and co-author of "The Street Chronicles" with Nikki Turner.
Pray also serves as Editor in Chief of Gangster Chronicles. Pray's CD "Akbar Speaks" invaded the mix tape circuit and allowed Pray's voice to be heard via a medium relevant to today's youth.
Pray is the CEO and Founder of Akbar Pray's Foundation For Change (APFFC). His APFFC non-profit organization is dedicated to re-directing the lives of at-risk urban youth.


== Health ==
Pray has hypertension, prostate problems, and glaucoma. He is blind in one eye. While in prison, he received double hip replacement surgery.


== References ==

Sun Sentinel
Afro-Lineal Organized Crime Report
https://www.candoclemency.com/wayne-pray/


== External links ==
Akbar Pray Official Website
Akbar Pray Foundation For Change (APFFC)