Persatuan Sepak Bola Indonesia Kota Tangerang, or Persikota Tangerang, is an Indonesian football club based in Tangerang, founded in 1994. The team plays in the second division of Indonesian football Liga 2 since promotion from Liga 3. Their home stadium is Benteng Stadium.


== History ==
Persikota Tangerang was established on 11 October 1994 through the PSSI congress which was held at the end of December 1995, Persikota Tangerang was legalized as a member of PSSI and allowed to participate in the Liga Indonesia competition in the 1995–1996 season. After founding of the club, Persikota Tangerang won the Liga Indonesia Second Division in the 1995–1996 season after won 2–0 over Persipal Palu and won 1–0 against Persewangi Banyuwangi, Entering Liga Indonesia First Division in the 1996–1997 season, in order to prepare an adequate team in Division I, Persikota, which previously had recruited a number of national players from Pelita Jaya and Persija Jakarta, has now recruited several national and foreign players, Francis Yonga from Cameroon and Ali Shaha from Tanzania.
As a result, Persikota won the group and qualified for the Big 10 round. In the top 10, Persikota joined in group A and had to meet PSIM Yogyakarta, PSS Sleman, PSSB Bireuen, and Persiter Ternate which took place at the Mandala Krida Stadium, Yogyakarta. After recording pretty good results, winning two 5-2 wins against PSSB Bireuen, 3–0 against PSS Sleman, a 0–0 draw against PSIM Yogyakarta and a 4–3 defeat against Persiter Ternate, Persikota represented group A with Persiter to advance to the semifinal. and in the semifinals, Persikota faced the winner of group B, Perseden Denpasar, then Persikota managed to win through Nova Zaenal's goal in the 69th minute and the final result, they won through to the final round, Persikota had to again face PSIM who beat Persikabo Bogor 2–1 in the semifinals, which took place at the Mandala Krida stadium, Yogyakarta, the final result of Persikota was able to beat PSIM with a score of 3–1. And they qualified for the Liga Indonesia Premier Division in 1997–1998 season, earning the nickname Bayi Ajaib (In English: The Magical Baby). The highest achievement ever achieved by Persikota Tangerang was reaching the semifinals of the 1999-2000 Liga Indonesia Premier Division. This team is supported by a supporter groups called Benteng Mania.
Throughout the Liga Indonesia period in the 2000s, Persikota Tangerang was never relegated to the Division below it until 2013 due to the club's financial difficulties. In 2016, with the management and management of the new club, Persikota Tangerang is determined to rise from the second division, Liga 3. Persikota is currently competing in Liga 3 Banten zone from 2017 to 2021. In June 2021, the club was bought by Indonesian presenter and actor Gading Marten. On 2 November 2021, Persikota Tangerang made league match debut in 2021–22 season in a 5–1 win against Bantara SC at the Krakatau Steel Stadium, the achievement of 3 points at the same time led the club to top the provisional standings of Group B 2021 Liga 3 Banten zone. On 1 December 2021, 2021 Liga 3 Banten zone has been held and Persikota has become the champion to represent the province at the national level. On 30 January 2022, the club was bought by Indonesian actress, host, and singer Prilly Latuconsina. previously, the club was bought by Gading Marten but canceled.


== Players ==


=== Current squad ===
As of 7 September 2024

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.


== Supporters ==
Persikota Tangerang has a large fanbase called Benteng Mania. Benteng Mania was founded in 1994 and its headquarters is at the Benteng Stadium, home to Persikota Tangerang. Benteng Mania now has 10,000 members in Tangerang.
Benteng Mania has its branches all around Indonesia. Among them are: Transit, Ciledug, V-room, Hard Kids, Sepatan, Benteng Makassar, Cipondoh, Benda, Kota, Kota Bumi, C-mone, Karawaci, Benua Indah complex (ROBIN), BInong, and Tanah Tinggi.
Benteng Mania also sang its own official songs during matches.


== Club rivalries ==
Unlike the Old Indonesia derby between Persija Jakarta and Persib Bandung, the Tangerang Derby can actually be said to be young. The beginning of the rivalry between the two Tangerang clubs was due to the expansion of the Tangerang area (which at that time was still a district). When it was still called Tangerang Regency, the only football club that existed was Persita Tangerang which had been established since 1953.
Matches between these two clubs often present a high level of rivalry, not only from the club side but also from its supporters, a number of riots between supporters often break out when these two teams compete. This led the Tangerang Indonesian Ulema Council (MUI) to issue a fatwa forbidden to hold a football match in this area in 2012. This is of course the implication of a number of victims who have fallen due to the riots of supporters throughout the history of the Tangerang Derby.


== Honours ==
Liga Indonesia Second Division
Champions: 1995–96
Liga Indonesia First Division
Champions: 1996–97
Liga 3 Banten
Champions: 2018,2019, 2021
Runners-up: 2022, 2023


== Notable former players ==
This is the list of several domestic and foreign former notable or famous players of Persikota Tangerang from time to time.


=== Indonesia ===
 Jendri Pitoy
 Maulana Hasanuddin
 Yeyen Tumena
 Aliyudin Ali
 Jalwandi
 Andrian Mardiansyah
 Firmansyah
 Denny Agus
 Zainal Anwar
 Indra Kahfi Ardhiyasa
 Ishak Djober
 Muhammad Ilham
 Yudi Khoerudin
 Ritham Madubun
 Yandi Munawar
 Kahar Kalu Muzakkar
 Mohammad Nasuha
 Imran Nahumarury
 Listianto Raharjo
 Supriyono Salimin
 Ruben Sanadi
 Harry Saputra
 Leo Saputra
 Rendy Siregar
 Amin Syarifudin
 Ledi Utomo
 Francis Wewengkang


=== Africa (CAF) ===
 Ali Shaha
 Francis Yonga
 Moustapha Moctar Belbi
 Christian Lenglolo
 Epalla Jordan
 Salomon Bengondo
 Saphou Lassy
 Samuel Chebli
 Joseph Amoah


=== South America (CONMEBOL) ===
 Esteban Guillén
 Bruno Zandonaide


== Mascot ==
Kareo Bird is official mascot of Tangerang City.


== References ==


== External links ==
Persikota Tangerang at Soccerway
Persikota Tangerang at Instagram