Tu Chor Main Sipahi (English: You the thief, I the cop) is a 1996 Indian action film starring Akshay Kumar, Saif Ali Khan, Tabu and Pratibha Sinha. It was directed by Guddu Dhanoa and written by Rumi Jaffery and Robin Henry.


== Plot ==
Raja is a notorious criminal, who robs well-to-do people using his alias King. Inspector Amar Verma  is a police officer tracking him. Verma and the Mumbai Police want King arrested at any cost. Things become worse for Verma when King robs the commissioner's house. Commissioner Kushal Singh warns Verma to arrest King within four days or get ready to be transferred to Tandarikala, a remote location which is also called the graveyard of policemen, as few policeman came back alive from there.
Amar is almost successful in arresting King but on their way back, Amar becomes injured in an incident involved with local bandits and King takes advantage of this situation and ditches Amar in the middle of the road and himself goes to Tandarikala, posing as a fake inspector. When Raja aka King reaches Tandarikala, he learns that the village is ruled by a merciless ruler, Thakur Gajendra Singh. Thakur leaves all old men to their fate, but abducts young men to work for him including minors.
In Tandarikala, Raja is surprised to see Guddu, a village simpleton, who is a look alike of Amar. It is later revealed that Guddu is actually Inspector Amar who followed Raja to arrest him but after seeing the condition of the villagers by the hands of Thakur, he changes his mind and together with Raja, decides to eliminate the tyranny of thakur from the village.
In the end, they succeed by killing the Thakur and his goons and in the ending scene, it is shown that Amar handcuffs Raja and they both share a laugh together.


== Cast ==
Source

Akshay Kumar as Inspector Amar Verma/Guddu
Saif Ali Khan as Raja
Tabu as Kajal Singh
Pratibha Sinha as Rani
Amrish Puri as Thakur Gajendra Singh
Anupam Kher as Police Commissioner Kushal Singh
Deven Verma as ACP Verma, Amar's dad
Harish Patel as Home Minister
Rajesh Puri as Commissioner's doctor
Narendra Gupta as Chote Khan
Brahmachari as Biharilal
Ankush Mohit as Vikram
Gyan Shivpuri as Himmat Singh


== Music ==
Music by Dilip Sen-Sameer Sen.
Lyrics by Anand Bakshi.
Tracks are listed below.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tu Chor Main Sipahi at IMDb