KNTU (88.1 FM) is the radio station owned and operated by the University of North Texas. The signal of the station covers much of the Dallas and Fort Worth Metroplex with an indie alternative format. 
KNTU also produces the UNT football and men's basketball broadcast feeds for the Mean Green Sports Network, a radio property of Learfield for broadcast on 97.1 FM. UNT women's basketball moved to streaming only on Learfield's Varsity App beginning with the 2022-23 season.


== History ==
KNTU was founded in 1969 in part by Bill Mercer, former voice of the Dallas Cowboys, North Texas Mean Green, and a member of the Texas Radio Hall of Fame. Originally on the 88.5 FM frequency, the station officially went on the air on October 31, 1969. Along with music, Mean Green football game broadcasts were soon added, with Mercer providing play-by-play coverage and UNT students usually serving as his color commentators.
The station switched to a jazz format in 1981, while continuing to host public affairs shows and North Texas athletic events. While KNTU had no direct competitors, it shared audiences with 106.1 from 1987 to 1992 and 107.5 from 1992 to 2006 (both with the KOAI callsigns) as smooth jazz-formatted stations branded "The Oasis."
On July 29, 2022, KNTU switched to an alternative format, "88.1 indie," reflecting the station's independent status. The first song was "Icky Thump" by the White Stripes. The jazz format continues to stream online, and is broadcast on 88.1 HD-2. 
The latest format flip puts KNTU in competition with North Texas Public Broadcasting's Adult album alternative-formatted KKXT (91.7),Audacy-owned KVIL (Alt 103.7), iHeartMedia’s classic rock-formatted KZPS (Lone Star 92.5), iHeartMedia’s active rock-formatted KEGL (97.1 The Eagle), and iHeartMedia-owned KEGL-HD2 (97.1 HD2 The Edge).


== Programming ==


== Signal ==
Unlike most of the area's FM stations (like competitor KVIL) which transmit their signals from Cedar Hill, KNTU transmits its signal from north Denton on land owned by UNT, which was a Nike Missile Base. Therefore, KNTU's signal is much stronger in the Northern parts of the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex as well as the cities of Denton, Decatur, and McKinney. The station installed a new antenna during the first week of November 2022.


== Notable former KNTU students ==
George Dunham (KTCK The Ticket)
Craig Miller (KTCK The Ticket)
Sean Bass (Sports Director, KTCK The Ticket)
Mark Followill (PxP Dallas Mavericks, FC Dallas)
Dave Barnett (PxP Dallas Mavericks, San Antonio Spurs, Texas Rangers)
Craig Way (Voice of the Texas Longhorns)
Tommy Bonk (LA Times writer who coined the phrase "Phi Slama Jama")


== References ==


== External links ==
KNTU website
University of North Texas Department of Media Arts

Facility details for Facility ID 69003 (KNTU)   in the FCC Licensing and Management System
KNTU in Nielsen Audio's FM station database
DFW Radio/TV History