Gully Rowdy is a 2021 Indian Telugu-language romantic action comedy film directed by G. Nageswara Reddy. Produced by Kona Venkat, M. V. V. Satyanarayana under Kona Film Corporation and MVV Cinemas, the film features Sundeep Kishan, Neha Shetty, Rajendra Prasad in primary roles. The music was composed by Sai Karthik–Ram Miriyala. It was released on 17 September 2021.


== Plot ==
The film begins at Vizag, where CI Raghu Nayak points Vasu & Head-constable Pattapagalu Venkatrao at a gun on the beach. Vasu rewinds his memories, as he is the grandson of a justice-seeking ruffian, Meesala Simhachalam. Besides, a monstrous goon, Bairagi Naidu, is covetous towards him and ruses to clutch charge of the city when Simhachalam confronts him, whom he mortifies publicly. Whereat, his acolyte Naidu, suggests Simhachalam sculpt Vasu, a bright student, into a rowdy since the absence of an heir to him. Though it frustrates & pesters Vasu, he adopts it for his grandfather's sake. 
Years roll by, and Vasu is ready for attack. Bairagi summits heights in the crime world and creates mayhem in society with his son Nandu. Once, Vasu flashes and falls for a software employee, Sahitya. She is Venkatrao's daughter, a paterfamilias to a bourgeoisie family. Soon, they hear their land in outstrikes hike prices for ₹2 crore (US$240,000) which squatted by Bairagi. Tragically, Bairagi settles the matter at ₹50,000 (US$600) by battering and showing danger to Venkatrao. Being conscious of it, Vasu declares to aid Sahitya's family when, with them, he plots to abduct Bairagi to retrieve their money as ransom. Hence, they all conduct vast recce and perfect schemes. On the verge, Bairagi senses and lays hold of them when, startlingly, a man under the veil shoots the miscreant at point-blank range. Next, Venkatrao & family fled by lifting their amount but, in a hurry, left evidence such as a shoe, fingerprints, spectacles, and some hair of each one, which the forensic lab produced. The officials reappoint Nayak, a reckless suspended cop, to investigate the case.
Meanwhile, Simhachalam is on cloud nine, assuming Vasu has slaughtered Bairagi but hard on the heels of upset discerning the fact. Parallelly, Sahitya is alive to Vasu's genuine love, and she, too, reciprocates. Following this, Vasu focuses on manipulating the proofs at the forensic lab via Venkatrao—additionally, they track over Nayak by planting a bug in his shoe. Here, as a flabbergast, they are mindful that Nayak is Bairagi's second spouse's son, which no one knows, and he is awaiting a shot against his father's homicides. Nayak moves forward with his investigation, where he smells Bairagi's enmity with both Vasu & Venkatrao and keeps them on edge of death. 
Apart from comprehending the actuality, Nandu seizes Venkatrao's family. Vasu tactically moves the pawn by forging Nandu as the actual killer before Nayak because they clash about Bairaji's second son. Nayak believes it because it is a closed secret when Vasu, Nayak, & Venkatrao attack Nanda to rescue the family, and Nayak shoots dead Nanda in Vasu's trap. At last, while Vasu & Sahitya are engaging, Simhachalam overhears that Vasu assassinated Bairagi, detecting that he has also slain his father on behalf of the accident. Later, Vasu spills before his grandfather, and as he detests rowdyism, he does not take credit for the murder. Ergo, Simhachalam relieves him to lead his life his way. Finally, the movie ends comically, Venkatrao carrying Vasu to a new settlement.


== Cast ==


== Production ==
After collaborating for Tenali Ramakrishna BA. BL, director Nageswara Reddy and actor Sandeep Kishan are working together again, for the film. Sandeep is playing a small-time gangster in the film. The film was officially launched on 16 December 2020 in Vizag, with a pooja ceremony and muhurtam shot done. Principal photography also began on the same day in Vizag. The team filmed for 63 days, as part of its first schedule. Filming took place in Visakhapatnam and Hyderabad. The team wrapped up the filming in June 2021. In an interview to Deccan Chronicle, G. Nageswara Reddy said that "Gully Rowdy is a sitcom on rowdyism", adding: "Although there are action elements, the film is narrated in a comical way. The protagonist is under an obligation to carry on the rowdyism legacy. But he doesn’t like it, so what he does to keep the legacy going and handle his love is hilariously presented".


== Soundtrack ==

The music was composed by Sai Karthik and Ram Miriyala. All lyrics are written by Bhaskarabhatla. The music was released by Mango Music Company. The first single track "Puttene Prema" corned and composed by Ram Miriyala was released on 7 May 2021. The second track "Changure Item Songree" sung by Mangli and composed by Sai Karthik was released on 22 July 2021.


== Release ==
Initially, it was reported that the film will be premiered (released) in a direct-to-video mode on a over-the-top media service. Later, Sundeep Kishan confirmed that the film will be released only in the movie theaters. The film was initially scheduled for a theatrical release on 21 May 2021, it was postponed to 3 September 2021. Later, it was again rescheduled to release on 17 September 2021.


== References ==


== External links ==
Gully Rowdy at IMDb