Salt Lake High School East or simply East High School is a public high school in the Salt Lake City School District in Salt Lake City, Utah, United States. It serves grades nine through twelve in general and special education. East High School was founded in 1913 and currently has an enrolled student body of around 1,900. It is located at 840 South 1300 East in the East Bench neighborhood. The original building was completed in 1913, and the current structure was built in 1997.
Most of the Disney Channel film High School Musical was filmed at East High School. The opening scenes of its first sequel High School Musical 2 (including the film's opening number, "What Time Is It?") were also filmed at East High. Additional filming took place in St. George. The filming of the second sequel High School Musical 3: Senior Year began at East High on May 3, 2008. High School Musical: The Musical: The Series was also filmed at East High School.


== History ==
In 1972, a fire destroyed the interior of the main building.
In 2017, the school re-purposed two locker rooms below the gymnasium and installed washing machines in order to accommodate homeless students. The non-profit organization Chapman-Richards Cares donated two washing machines and two dryers to the school. About 100 students at the time were homeless.
In July 2017, a flood caused about $3 million in damages to the school.


== High School Musical ==
Much of the Disney Channel film High School Musical and parts of its two sequels, High School Musical 2 and High School Musical 3: Senior Year, were filmed at East High. As a result, the school has become a destination for some tourists. In the summer of 2007, the school received 40 to 50 visitors per day who wanted to visit the location of the film.
In November 2007, the school staged its own production of High School Musical. Demand for tickets was so strong that the school added an extra performance.
The school is the setting of the Disney+ show, High School Musical: The Musical: The Series.
The exterior grounds of the school were used in the 1991 film Dream Machine.


== Notable alumni ==
Roseanne Barr, actress, comedian, writer, producer, and director
Jenny Oaks Baker, Grammy-nominated former violinist
Merrill Cook, former U.S. Representative
Alyosha Efros, computer vision researcher and winner of the 2016 ACM Prize in Computing
Herman Franks, former professional baseball player and manager
Patrick Fugit, actor, Almost Famous
Jake Garn, former U.S. Senator and astronaut
Greg Grant, former Big West Conference Men's Basketball Player of the Year
Josh Grant, former professional basketball player
Dee Hartford, actress
Abby Huntsman, American journalist and television co-host
James Irwin, astronaut and eighth person to walk on the Moon
Reed Jeppson, member of the school's football team, missing since 1964
Bob Lewis, member of University of Utah's national champion basketball team
Jim Matheson, former U.S. Representative
Scott M. Matheson, former Governor of Utah
Richard Moll, actor
Ritt Momney, indie-pop singer
Carol Ohmart, actress
Bruce "Utah" Phillips, civil rights activist, folk singer, story teller, and labor organizer
Sione Po'uha, defensive tackle for the New York Jets
Vernon B. Romney, former Attorney General of Utah
Ken Sansom, voice actor and actor; voice of Rabbit in Disney's Winnie the Pooh
Elizabeth Smart, kidnapping survivor and activist
Wallace Stegner, Pulitzer Prize-winning author
Taki Taimani, professional football player, Minnesota Vikings
Stevie Tu'ikolovatu, professional football player, Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Will Tukuafu, professional football player
Paul Van Dam, former Attorney General of Utah
Jaylen Warren, professional football player, Pittsburgh Steelers
Steven C. Wheelwright, Harvard Business School professor emeritus and former BYU-Hawaii president
Herb Wilkinson, former University of Utah and University of Iowa basketball player


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website