Ghayal: Once Again (transl. Wounded: Once again) is a 2016 Indian Hindi-language action drama film directed by Sunny Deol and produced by Dharmendra under Vijayta Films. The film, a direct sequel to Ghayal, stars Sunny Deol, Om Puri, Soha Ali Khan, Shivam Patil, Rishabh Arora, Abhilash Kumar, Neha Khan, Aanchal Munjal and Narendra Jha. The soundtrack and musical score were composed by Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy and Vipin Mishra, while cinematography and editing were handled by Ravi Yadav and Chandan Arora. 
Ghayal: Once Again was released worldwide on 5 February 2016.


== Plot ==
After the events of the previous film, Ajay Mehra gets released from prison and begins a new career as a reporter for an independent newspaper He also works as a vigilante who assists the police with their hard-to-prosecute cases (including cases where the accused are prominent and influential members of society). One such case involves small town reporter Renu who was drugged and assaulted by media baron Aditya Rajguru. Renu committed suicide and Rajguru's men covered up the matter, implicating her innocent boyfriend. Ajay swings into action and abducts Rajguru, soon forcibly obtaining his DNA. Rajguru is then arrested and Ajay is declared a sensational hero. However, Ajay still suffers anxiety attacks from the painful memories of his past, and his psychiatrist girlfriend Riya helps him with his problems.
Joe D'Souza has retired and is now a social activist. Ajay often collaborates with him and helps him out. However, D'Souza is killed in a traffic accident in Panvel. A blogger named Zoya Saigal is shocked to discover that Joe was actually shot dead. She had accidentally captured the murder on video, committed by Kabir Raj Bansal, who is the son of business mogul Raj Bansal. Zoya and her friends panic and want to take the video to the cops, but Zoya's friend Anushka's grandfather infers that Raj Bansal had staged the road accident (where 8 other innocent people were killed) and stops them, due to Bansal's power. It is further revealed that D'Souza had visited Raj Bansal and directly accused him of illegal land acquisition. Bansal tried to bribe him, but an argument ensues, where Kabir shot D'Souza in a fit of rage and the accident was covered up.
Bansal realizes that Kabir is still a bratty kid and decides to enrol him into a military school. Following her grandfather's advice, Anushka turns 
the video over to their friend Rohan's father lawyer, Kriplani in order to ensure the children remain safe. However, Kriplani quietly returns it to Bansal and Rohan realizes that his father has given up the video and thus urges Zoya to reach Ajay Mehra. As the children hurry to reach Ajay, they are intercepted by Bansal's thugs. A chase ensues and Ajay saves the children, recovering the video. Riya takes the children to the hospital, but they are yet again abducted by Bansal's men. Ajay finds that Anushka is his own daughter as her grandfather had kept the secret to shield her from Ajay's past. Kabir tortures the children until Bansal, tired of his son's tantrums, warns him away.
Bansal holds Anushka and releases the other children. He tells Ajay that his daughter will henceforth stay with Bansal in order to ensure the safety of Kabir. Bansal's mother objects, but Bansal, locked in moral conflict, waves her away. Bansal orders the Home Minister to arrest Ajay. Ajay overcomes the cops and mounts an attack on the Bansal mansion to rescue Anushka. After a fierce fight, Ajay rescues Bansal's family who gets trapped in the debris. Ajay then goes to the chopper landing, where he sees Kabir torturing Anushka and beats him up. He is about to kill him when Bansal apologizes to Ajay and Anushka where he, along with Kabir surrenders to the police. Ajay and Anushka recover in the hospital surrounded by their friends.


== Cast ==
Sunny Deol as Ajay Mehra
Soha Ali Khan as Dr. Riya
Shivam Patil as Rohan Kriplani
Aanchal Munjal as Anushka Mehra
Diana Khan as Zoya Saigal
Rishabh Arora as Varun / Fattu
Om Puri as ACP Joe D'Souza
Narendra Jha as Raj Bansal
Manoj Joshi as Home Minister Kaka Saheb
Tisca Chopra as Sheetal Bansal
Yo Yo Honey Singh as Bindu Villain
Ruhanika Dhawan as Ananya Bansal
Sachin Khedekar as Lawyer Sanjeev Kriplani
Ramesh Deo as Kulkarni
Srijitaa Ghosh as Renu
Jiten Mukhi as  Gajendra
Hina Rahevar as  Smita
Komal Raj as Radha
Farooq Saeed as  Salim
Anisha Hinduja as  Salma
Raymon Singh as Mamta Kriplani
Nadira Babbar as  Sita Bansal
Abhilash Kumar as Kabir Bansal
Zakir Hussain as Police Commissioner Ashraf Iqbal
Satyajeet Puri as Al Noor
Harsh Chhaya as Aditya Rajguru
Siraj Ahlawat as DCP Saurabh Sinha
Sushant Sharma as Arjun
Suchinit Singh
Ashish Tiwari as Trintera Tiwari
Lakshya Handa as Vicky Oberoi
Neha Khan
Sebastien Vandenberghe as Troy
Meenakshi Seshadri, Raj Babbar, Moushumi Chatterjee, and Amrish Puri appear as Varsha Sahay, Ashok Mehra, Indu Mehra and Balwant Rai respectively from the archive footage from Ghayal (1990).


== Production ==
In 2013 producer Dharmendra expressed his interest to work on the sequel to 1990 film Ghayal, and actor Sunny Deol was supposed to direct the movie, with the title Ghayal Once Again.


== Soundtrack ==
All songs composed by Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy with lyrics by Amitabh Bhattacharya.


== Box office ==
The film had grossed Rs 72.0 million on its first day of release and an estimated Rs 232.5 million by the end of its first weekend, according to film analyst Taran Adarsh.


== Sequel ==
After the release of this film, Sunny Deol expressed his interest to make a third part of this franchise.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ghayal: Once Again at IMDb
Ghayal: Once Again at Rotten Tomatoes