Streets of New York is a 1939 American film directed by William Nigh.
The film is also known as The Abe Lincoln of Ninth Avenue and The Abraham Lincoln of the 4th Avenue.


== Plot ==

Teenager Jimmy Keenan operates a newsstand and is studying to become a lawyer. He takes care of a crippled boy named Gimpy whose mother has died. Jimmy's brother Tap Keenan is a notorious criminal. A neighborhood gang led by Spike is trying to lead Jimmy into trouble.
Gimpy and Spike's gang are arrested for gambling. Jimmy convinces Judge Carroll that Gimpy had not actually gambled, as there was no evidence of money involved. The judge is impressed with Jimmy and releases the kids. Judge Carroll later learns that Jimmy is Tap's brother and urges Jimmy to continue to pursue his dream, hoping that he will not follow in his brother's path. Tap offers to finance Jimmy's education and wants Jimmy to work for him after graduating. Jimmy declines and warns Tap not to contact him.
After a Christmas gathering at Judge Carroll's home, Jimmy learns that Tap has killed a man and is hiding from the police. When Spike taunts Jimmy and mocks his mother, they fight. Jimmy returns to his room but finds Tap hiding there. Tap tries to convince Jimmy to help him to escape, but Jimmy insists that Tap surrender. As Gimpy enters, Tap shoots through the door and injures him. Jimmy wrestles with Tap and police arrest Tap several minutes later. After a few days, Jimmy is told that Gimpy will return later. Jimmy abandons the newspaper stand and continues to pursue his dream to become a lawyer like his hero Abraham Lincoln.


== Cast ==
Jackie Cooper as James Michael "Jimmy" Keenan
Martin Spellman as William McKinley "Gimpy" Smith
Marjorie Reynolds as Anne Carroll
Dick Purcell as T.P. 'Tap' Keenan
George Cleveland as Pop O'Toole
George Irving as Judge Carroll
Robert Emmett O'Connor as Police Officer Burke
Sidney Miller as Jiggsy, newsboy
David Durand as Spike Morgan
Buddy Pepper as Flatfoot, newsboy


== References ==


== External links ==

Streets of New York at IMDb
Abe Lincoln of the Ninth Avenue is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive