The Universidad de las Américas, Asociación Civil (UDLA, A.C.) is a university located in Mexico City, Mexico. It was founded in 1940 as the Mexico City College (MCC). In 1963, its name was changed to the University of the Americas and in 1968 to the Universidad de las Américas.
Since its founding the university has been located first in leased buildings at the Colonia Roma in Mexico City during the 1950s and later on an eight-acre campus on the Mexico-Toluca Road.  In the 1970s the university moved to a new campus in the State of Puebla, where it remained until 1985. That year, the Board of Associates decided to move all operations to Mexico City and to separate from the Universidad de las Américas Puebla.
At the present time the university continues its mission as a bilingual (English–Spanish) institution, the only one in Mexico offering general instruction in two languages.


== International classifications ==
The Universidad de las Américas, A.C., in Mexico City, is qualified as follows in the national lists published in Mexican newspapers Reforma and El Universal en 2012:

Psychology: 2nd place in Reforma and 2nd place in El Universal
Business administration: 7th place in Reforma and 2nd place in El Universal
Information systems: 4th place in Reforma and no evaluation in El Universal
International relations: 6th place in Reforma and 4th place in El Universal
Mass media: 8th place in Reforma and 2nd place in El Universal
Law: 11th place in El Universal and no evaluation in Reforma
The program in special education is not evaluated in the surveys.


== Accreditation ==
The Universidad de las Américas, A.C., is accredited by the following associations
At national level:

The Ministry of Public Education Secretaría de Educación Pública (SEP in Spanish) Grants to BA, specialty, master and doctorate the Recognition of Official Validity (RVOE in Spanish).
The National Association of Universities and Higher Educations Institutions (ANUIES in Spanish), Accredited since 1998.
Federation of Mexican Private Institutions of Higher Education, (FIMPES) accredited for the 2006-2012 period.
National Council for Teaching and Research in Psychology (CNEIP) Consejo Nacional para la Enseñanza e Investigación en Psicología (CNEIP)
Council for the Accreditation of Communication A.C. (CONAC) Consejo de Acreditación de la Comunicación A.C. (CONAC)
Accrediting Council in the Teaching of Accounting and Management, A.C. (CACECA) Consejo de Acreditación en la Enseñanza de la Contaduría y Administración A.C. (CACECA)
Association for the Accreditation and Certification in Social Sciences, A.C. (ACCESISO) Asociación para la Acreditación y Certificación en Ciencias Sociales, A.C. (ACCESISO)
National Council for the Accreditation of Higher Education in Law, A.C. (CONFEDE) Consejo Nacional para la Acreditacion de la Educación Superior en Derecho, A.C. (CONFEDE)
At the international level:

Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS)


== Academic programs ==


=== Continuing education ===
The Universidad de las Américas offers continuing education courses and diploma programs in management, education, psychology, science and technology and law.


== Outstanding graduates ==
Erik Mora, sports director for Telemundo 39, sports anchor and video journalist
Ricardo Blanco, products communication manager for Latin America in YouTube and Google
Mauricio Cabrera, general editor, [mediotiempo.com] (Expansión Editorial Group)
Carlos M. Hernández, general manager México and Central America Abbott Diagnostics
José Isabel Benítez, general manager for business and services, Price Shoes
Raúl Toscano, human resources director for Mexico and Latin America of the  Swiss Bank
Benilde Muro, human resources manager at   HSBC London, UK
Ana Paula Blanco, chief of the area of communication and public business for North America and the United States, Google
Mónica Ochoa, general director for Asia and Pacific, Mexican Foreign Service, Servicio Exterior Mexicano
Lilia del Carmen Morales, consul in Leamington, Ontario
Juan Carlos Méndez, legal director at Prudential Seguros
Mauricio Domingo, legal vice president at Herbalife International de México, S.A de C.V.
Nancy Bernal, director of international affairs of the Instituto Nacional para el Federalismo y el Desarrollo Municipal (Inafed) of the Interior Ministry Secretaría de Gobernación.
Fernando Barocio, legal director of the El Universal
Cynthia Corro, manager of the legal department of Casa Cuervo
Rodrigo Caraballo, director of judicial affairs of the Instituto Politécnico Nacional
Gilberto Carrillo, chief of information auditing in Radiomóvil DIPSA, S.A de C.V. (Telcel)
Leonor McCall-Rodriguez, executive director, Regis University Dual Language Campus
Antonio Briceño Ortiz, division CFO, International Sales Division Daimler Trucks North America
Oriol Pi-Sunyer, professor emeritus, University of Massachusetts Amherst Department of Anthropology


== References ==


== External links ==

University Homepage (in Spanish)