Aya Yamane (山根 綺, Yamane Aya, born 4 February 1997) is a Japanese voice actress and singer affiliated with Aoni Production. She is known for voicing Shisel in Magatsu Wahrheit: Zuerst, Ruhuyu in Show by Rock!!, Mikoto Aketa in The Idolmaster Shiny Colors, Daitaku Helios in Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Sui Yamada in World's End Harem, Benisumomo in In the Heart of Kunoichi Tsubaki, Riho Tsukishima in The Café Terrace and Its Goddesses, and Cathy in Sugar Apple Fairy Tale.


== Biography ==
Yamane was born on 4 February 1997 in Yokohama. She is of Chinese descent, with her father being half-Chinese and her mother being one-fourth Chinese. She was educated at a high school near Yokohama Station and Amusement Media Academy, where she was part of the 2016 graduating class. She was an assistant personality for Yū Kobayashi's radio show Kobayashi Yu Weekly.
In September 2020, she was cast as Shisel in Magatsu Wahrheit: Zuerst. In December 2020, she was cast as Sui Yamada in World's End Harem. In March 2022, she was cast as Benisumomo in In the Heart of Kunoichi Tsubaki. In September 2022, she was cast as Freya Chocolate in Sylvanian Families: Freya's Happy Diary. In November 2022, she was cast as Riho Tsukishima in The Café Terrace and Its Goddesses. In December 2022, she voiced Cathy in Sugar Apple Fairy Tale. In August 2023, she was cast as Noir in Rail Romanesque.
She voiced Mikoto Aketa, one of the two members of the unit SHHis, in The Idolmaster Shiny Colors, a spinoff of The Idolmaster franchise. Previously, she had unsuccessfully auditioned for Shiny Colors and Cinderella Girls, including for Shiny Colors characters Tōru Asakura and Hinana Ichikawa, and she chose Mikoto over Luca Ikaruga because she "saw [in the former] a future where we could walk together". She performed in two SHHis singles: Layered Wing 08 (which charted at #6 in the Oricon Singles Chart) and Panorama Wing 08 (which charted at #10 in the Oricon Singles Chart).
She voiced Ruhuyu as part of Mashumairesh!!, an in-universe singing unit in Sanrio's Show by Rock!! franchise. She voiced the character in the anime adaptation Show by Rock!! Mashumairesh!! and the game Show by Rock!! Fes A Live, and she performed in Mashumairesh!!'s 2021 single Trigger Rock. She voices Daitaku Helios in the Uma Musume Pretty Derby franchise; she reprised the role in the anime, video game, and 2023 stage play.
She is a member of the seiyū vocal unit Kleissis, where she portrays the in-group role of Hirona.


== Filmography ==


=== Anime series ===
2016
Orange, schoolgirl
2017
One Piece, Onē-san
The Idolmaster SideM, schoolgirl
2018
Bakutsuri Bar Hunter, trolling girl
GeGeGe no Kitarō, Kumiko Dote, Karin Yamane
Hug! Pretty Cure, chibi Hari
Muhyo & Roji's Bureau of Supernatural Investigation, student
2019
Actors: Songs Connection, SASA
Case Closed, receptionist
Kiratto Pri Chan, girl
Rifle Is Beautiful, announcer
The Disastrous Life of Saiki K.: Reawakened, elementary school student
2020
A Certain Scientific Railgun T, Shokuho faction member
A Destructive God Sits Next to Me, young Utsugi Tsukimiya
Attack on Titan, kids
Chibi Maruko-chan, Miyake-san
Fire Force, hostess
Fly Me to the Moon, reporter
If My Favorite Pop Idol Made It to the Budokan, I Would Die, Ruri
Is the Order a Rabbit? Bloom, kid
Kaguya-sama: Love Is War, friend
Magatsu Wahrheit: Zuerst, Shisel
Mewkledreamy, Mika
Our Last Crusade or the Rise of a New World, Michaela
Re:Zero, villager
Seton Academy: Join the Pack!, young Jin Mazama
Show by Rock!! Mashumairesh!!, Ruhuyu
Tamayomi, Shūgetsu Yō
The Day I Became a God, festival guest
The Millionaire Detective Balance: Unlimited, police officer
2021
Amaim Warrior at the Borderline, immovable Naho
Blue Reflection Ray, Saya
Cells at Work!, platelet 2, solar cell
Full Dive, Melissa
Selection Project, Marie
Skate-Leading Stars, student
Taisho Otome Fairy Tale, young Tamahiko Shima, Yukino
Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Daitaku Helios
Vivy: Fluorite Eye's Song, Leclerc
WIXOSS Diva(A)Live , Mē-chan
World's End Harem, Sui Yamada
2022
Healer Girl, Kenji Morishima
In the Heart of Kunoichi Tsubaki, Benisumomo
Luminous Witches, Rosalie de la Poype
Mobile Suit Gundam: The Witch from Mercury, Secelia Dote
Raven of the Inner Palace, third consort
Skeleton Knight in Another World, Ceriana
Sylvanian Families: Freya's Happy Diary, Freya Chocolate
2023
16bit Sensation: Another Layer, Toya Yamada
The Café Terrace and Its Goddesses, Riho Tsukishima
Rail Romanesque, Noir
Rurouni Kenshin, Makimachi Misao
Sugar Apple Fairy Tale, Cathy
2024
2.5 Dimensional Seduction, 753♡
Chillin' in Another World with Level 2 Super Cheat Powers, Balirossa
Demon Lord 2099, Reynard Hizuki Yamada
Re:Monster, Hobsei
Re:Zero, Liliana Masquerade
'Tis Time for "Torture," Princess, Krall
The Unwanted Undead Adventurer, Laura Satii


=== Original net animation ===
Pokémon: Twilight Wings (2020), secretary
Kaiju Decode (2021), Real Rei
Tawawa on Monday (2021), Holstein-san
Onimusha (2023), Sayo


=== Anime films ===
My Hero Academia: Heroes Rising (2019)
Goblin Slayer: Goblin's Crown (2020), female warrior
Pokémon the Movie: Secrets of the Jungle (2020)
Sailor Moon Eternal (2021), Deimos
My Oni Girl (2024), Mio Takahashi


=== Video games ===
2017
Robot Girls Z Online, Bardaler
2018
Onsen Musume: Yunohana Collection, Karen Misasa
2019
Atelier Online: Alchemists of Bressisle, Ran
Kemono Friends 3, California Rakko
Reverse Othellonia, Sakura
2020
Genjuu Keiyaku Cryptract, Isna
Show by Rock!! Fes A Live, Ruhuyu
White Cat Project, Kuroka Manetho
2021
KonoSuba: God's Blessing on this Wonderful World! Fantastic Days, Carla
Gate of Nightmares, Jasmine, Riley
Metallic Child, Surai
Quiz RPG: The World of Mystic Wiz, Tsuzumi Kizaki
The Idolmaster Shiny Colors, Mikoto Aketa
Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Daitaku Helios
2022
Heaven Burns Red, Seika Higuchi
Goddess of Victory: Nikke, D 


=== Stage plays ===
Uma Musume Pretty Derby, Daitaku Helios


== References ==


== External Links ==
Aya Yamane  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia