The Connecticut Department of Administrative Services (DAS) is a department of the American state of Connecticut. It oversees many of the state's core functions and acts as a service provider and administrator for other state departments and agencies.


== Overview ==
The Department of Administrative Services (DAS) is the nerve center for Connecticut state government. From statewide human resources to information technology to building and construction services, to procurement, to fleet operations, to grant administration, and more, DAS helps state government function.
DAS offers services for state agencies, municipalities, businesses, and individuals. On this site, you can:

Search and apply for exciting careers in state government.
Learn about state contact opportunities.
Find resources for small and minority-owned businesses.
Explore state surplus and auctions.
View state building and fire codes.
Understand state employee benefits.
And much more.


== History ==
Michelle Halloran Gilman serves as the Commissioner of the Connecticut State Department of Administrative Services (DAS). She was appointed by Governor Ned Lamont and has been serving in her position since February 2022.
As Commissioner, Gilman oversees approximately 1,000 employees and a $250 million+ budget providing centralized human resources, technology delivery, procurement support, and construction management primarily to Connecticut’s Executive Branch. Under her tenure, Gilman has stabilized the Connecticut’s state workforce in a competitive, post-pandemic economy in order to meet the service delivery needs of Connecticut residents. Additionally, she has initiated numerous recruitment and retention efforts, with a particular focus on the healthcare, engineering, and information technology sectors.  
Gilman has also prioritized centralizing the state’s IT apparatus making resources and knowledge more accessible to state agencies, has begun development of a statewide digital equity plan to ensure all residents have access to the education and hardware necessary to participate in our digital economy, and has oversight on ambitious climate sustainability measures across the department. Further, working in collaboration with federal, state, and non-profit partners, Gilman has continued to expand agency capacity to support small and minority businesses seeking to do business with the state.
As Commissioner, Gilman serves on several policy boards including the State Bond Commission, the Connecticut Paid Family Leave Authority, and the IT Capital Investment Committee.
Previously, Gilman served as Deputy Chief Operating Officer to Governor Lamont. In that role, she successfully managed COVID-19 initiatives including the alternate hospital mobilization, the nationally recognized free testing program for vulnerable populations, and the mass vaccination implementation.
Prior to joining the Lamont Administration, Gilman served as an advisor to numerous elected officials including U.S. Senator Christopher Dodd and State Comptroller Kevin Lembo. A life-long resident of Connecticut, Gilman is a proud graduate of Central Connecticut State University
On February 1, 2022, Governor Lamont announced that Josh Geballe has accepted a new job opportunity in the private sector and plans to leave service with the state effective February 14, 2022. The governor appointed Michelle Gilman of Colchester to succeed Geballe in the position of DAS commissioner. Gilman served as deputy chief operating officer in a position that she’s held since March 2020. In this role, she has managed numerous COVID-19 initiatives on behalf of the Lamont administration, including overseeing the alternate hospital site initiative to prepare for potential surge capacity, as well as implementation of the state’s nationally recognize free testing program with a strong emphasis on access for vulnerable populations. More recently, she supported the state’s vaccine program roll-out, working closely with medical providers, municipalities, and workforce partners to ensure an efficient, equitable implementation. Throughout the pandemic, she also assisted with PPE, medical equipment, and testing supply management to meet the needs of the state’s residents.
In July 2013 the Connecticut Department of Public Works became part of the DAS.
In 2019 Governor Ned Lamont appointed Josh Geballe as commissioner. Geballe is a ten-year IBM veteran who most recently served as CEO of New Haven based Core Informatics. He replaced retiring Commissioner Melody Currey.


== Components ==
Bureau of Enterprise Systems and Technology


== External links ==
DAS website


== References ==