Premier Music International Limited is an English musical instruments manufacturing company based in Kibworth. The company, founded in 1922, currently produces drum kits, sticks and accessories.


== History ==
Premier was established in 1922 when a drummer, Albert Della Porta, partnered with George Smith to establish a company. They set up on Berwick Street in London, and were soon joined by Albert's brother Fred, who eventually became the first sales manager of the recently created company.

In the beginning, they manufactured drums for other companies like John E. Dallas (with the "Jedson" trademark), then starting with "Premier" instruments. Early drum kits consisted of a bass drum, a snare, a stand, a cymbal, and sometimes a small tom-tom. The company grew to two factories, ending up in West London's Park Royal. By 1938 they were also producing brass instruments, as well as supplying drums to the armed forces. The company even built a guitar called "Premier Vox", in the early 1930s.
During World War II, the Government forced Premier to manufacture gun sights and electrical plugs and sockets for radar equipment. After the West London factory was bombed in 1940, the company moved to the Leicestershire town of South Wigston, where they occupied three small factories.
By 1986, Premier was one of the biggest factories in South Wigston, with 100,000 square feet covered and 180 employees. The company also exported its products to 120 countries. However, in 2008, shortly after the NAMM show, Premier finally closed the factory and the entire site was eventually demolished in 2017. Once established in its new home in Kibworth Harcourt, Leicestershire, the brand was purchased by the online retailer Gear4music on 21 June 2021.


== Artists ==

Ringo Starr - The Beatles
Julien Brown – Massive Attack
Rick Buckler – The Jam
Clem Burke – Blondie
Phil Collins – Genesis
Bobby Elliott – The Hollies
Ginger Fish – Marilyn Manson, Rob Zombie
Nick Mason – Pink Floyd
Nicko McBrain – Iron Maiden
Mitch Mitchell – The Jimi Hendrix Experience
Keith Moon – The Who
Philip Selway – Radiohead
Chris Sharrock
Brad Wilk – Rage Against the Machine
Johnny Blitz - Dead Boys
Sam Woodyard - Duke Ellington
Rufus "Speedy" Jones
Hunt Sales - Iggy Pop
Jerry Nolan - The Heartbreakers
Bobby Colomby - Blood, Sweat & Tears
Philly Joe Jones
Eric Delaney
Ronnie Verrell
Nicholas 'Nick' Barker (Ancient ; Borstal ; Brujeria ; Cradle of Filth ; Dimmu Borgir ; Liquid Graveyard ; Lock Up ; Monolith ; Noctis Imperium ; Obskkvlt ; Old Man's Child ; Shining ; Twilight of the Gods ; Winter's Thrall)


== Drum lines ==
APK/XPK series
Elite Series (1970s)
Resonator Series
Soundwave Series (1970s & 1980s)
Black Shadow – A unique run of the Resonator series with a specially applied lacquer finish
Projector Series
Signia Series
Signia Marquis Series
Genista (original 90s version used only birch)
Gen X (4ply maple/2ply birch)
Artist Series
Series Elite (Maple/Birch/Gen-X Hybrid)
One series drums – unique one off kits and snares named of British towns and places of interest
Modern Classic drums
Club (rebranded continuation of 1979 Olympic)
Olympic by Premier(1937-1979, 1991–present), inc. Super Olympic
Royale
Snare drums

2000 Snare
Royal Ace Snare
Carmine Appice Signature Snare
Project One Snare
2003 Snare
2005 Snare
Heavy Rock Nine 14"X9" Brass Snare
Modern Classic Snares
XC Series – part of the 90th-anniversary line.
B.E.A.S.T. Snare
1005 (Olympic brand)
Hardware

250 & 250S bass drum pedal
252 bass drum pedal
1251 bass drum pedal
Other

Gordon Mann 1 Wing Pipes and Drums
Zyn Cymbals (Formerly)
Power control unit: Model 1650.Bass drum damper. Worked by pivoting damper towards head, using a lever:


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Premier Percussion at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Photo's of the derelict factory in 2017