Chechen cuisine is the traditional folk cuisine of the Chechen people, who dwell in the North Caucasus.
The bases of Chechen cuisine are meat, leeks, cheese, pumpkin and corn. The main components of Chechen dishes include spicy seasonings, onion, wild garlic, pepper and thyme.
Chechen cuisine is known for having rich dishes, and is also typically simple to prepare and easily digestible.


== Dishes ==


=== Main dishes ===

Barsh (БӀарш) - Mutton stomach stuffed with ground meat, similar to haggis.
Chepalgash (ЧIепалгаш) - Type of pie filled with cottage cheese and wild garlic.
Dalnash (Далнаш) - Chudu (pie) filled with lards and wild garlic.
Daqina-Jijig (Дакъина-Жижиг) - Smoked meat
Hingalsh (Хингалш) - Sort of half-round pie filled with pumpkin and butter (or clarified butter). It is one of the most popular dishes of the Chechen cuisine.
Holtmash (ХьолтӀмаш) - Dumplings made from corn flour and filled with nettle.
Jijig-Chorpa (Жижиг-Чорпа) - Soup made of mutton or beef, tomatoes, potatoes, etc.
Jijig-Galnash (Жижиг-Галнаш) - Galnash (Sort of boiled dough) with meat (mostly mutton, chicken and beef).
Kiald-Davtta (Киалд-Давтта) - Cottage cheese with butter.
Kkherzan-Dulkh (Кхерзан-Дулх) - Fried meat (mutton or beef) with vegetables.
Khudar (Худар) - Porridge with cheese.
Khychin (кычин) - Traditional flatbread eaten throughout the Caucasus region.
Shashlik (Шашлык) - Traditional kebab from the Caucasus region, they are consumed throughout Chechnya.
Siskal (Сискал) - Fried cornbreads.
To-Beram (ТIо-берам) - Sauce made of sour cream and cottage cheese. Often accompanied with Chechen corn breads.
Yokh (Йоьхь) - Sausage made of wheat flour, mutton meat (minced), chicken fat and garlic.


=== Desserts ===
Ahar Hovla (Ахьар Хьовла) - Helva made from corn flour.
Dema Hovla (Дема Хьовла) - Helva made from wheat flour.
Garzni Hovla (Гарзни Хьовла) - Helva made from wheat flour in form of noodles.
Gvaymakkhsh (Гваймакхш) - Sort of pancakes with honey.
Vieta (Виета) is a Chechen national dish of flax seeds with a thick liquid mass of dark brown color obtained from chopped fried or simply dried flax seeds by grinding in millstones. It is used in the traditional cuisine of Chechens, like a nutritious sweet dish, mixing with sugar or honey and oil. Any can be added oil: vegetable or cream melted. Vieta - "Linum" has long been common among Chechens; an exquisite dish is prepared from its ground seeds - linum pasta - by frying linseed flour in boiling oil with sugar or honey. Chechens prepare a dish only from seeds linum (flax).


== References ==


== External links ==
National Cuisine of Chechnya (sun-trek.ru)