Khandaan (transl. Clan) is a 1979 Indian Hindi-language drama film, produced by Sibte Hassan Rizvi under the New World Enterprises banner and directed by Anil Ganguly. It stars Jeetendra, Sulakshana Pandit, Bindiya Goswami and the music was composed by Khayyam. It was a remake of the 1952 Bombay Talkies film Maa which was directed by Bimal Roy, in which Leela Chitnis played the eponymous role of the mother/Maa. Khandaan was remade in Telugu as Jeevitha Ratnam (1981).


== Plot ==
Gauri Shankar works as a clerk in a firm. He lives with his wife, Savitri, and two sons, Vikas and Ravi. Vikas marries Nanda. Ravi leads a playful life, and falls for Usha. Vikas gets a job and he must deposit a large amount of money as security. Gauri Shankar tries to collect the money but fails. Desperate, he steals money from his office but is caught. Ravi decides to incriminate himself to keep his father out of jail and is sentenced. Gauri Shankar passes away after divulging the truth to Savitri who keeps this a secret. Vikas leaves his mother alone after getting the job. Ravi returns home after serving his sentence. Vikas manipulates him to go away from their lives and he gets to know that Usha is about to be married off. Saddened, Ravi moves to the city, where he meets Sandhya, the daughter of Seth Dharmdas. Dharmdas gives him a job. Ravi gains his boss's trust and Sandhya falls in love with him but he gently turns her down. It turns out that Usha did not get married as she loved Ravi and wanted to wait for him. Usha spots Ravi with Sandhya and becomes despondent but the misunderstanding is soon cleared up. Through Usha, Ravi gets to know the extent of his brother's betrayal. He confronts his brother after witnessing his mother's pitiful condition but Savitri stops him. Vikas and Nanda become remorseful and apologize for their behavior. The movie ends on a happy note with the marriage of Ravi and Usha.


== Cast ==


== Soundtrack ==
Music composed by Khayyam with lyrics by Naqsh Lyallpuri. The song "Mana teri nazar nein" was recorded for this movie, but was filmed in a later film Ahista Ahista, with music by Khayyam


== External links ==
Khandaan at IMDb
Khandaan movie info
Khandaan music info