Brittney Marie Hernandez (nee Karbowski [kərˈbɔfski]; born June 26, 1986) is an American voice actress who has voiced in a number of English-language versions of Japanese anime series.
Karbowski was born in Sugar Land, a suburb of Houston and since 2004, she has voiced Mikoto Misaka in A Certain Magical Index, Rimuru Tempest in That Time I Got Reincarnated as a Slime, Sanae Dekomori in Love, Chunibyo & Other Delusions, Mikan Yuuki in To Love Ru, Wendy Marvell in Fairy Tail, Yamada in B Gata H Kei, and Camie Utushimi in My Hero Academia. In addition, Karbowski also voices several characters that are also voiced by Tomori Kusunoki, Ari Ozawa and Ayane Sakura.
In addition to her voice acting career, Karbowski has starred in numerous films such as Puncture and The Starving Games.


== Early life ==
Karbowski was born on June 26, 1986, in Sugar Land, Texas. She graduated Kempner High School in 2004 and attended University of Houston briefly where she majored in theater.


== Career ==

Karbowski started her acting career in theater productions such as Little Shop of Horrors, Seussical, and Pirates of Penzance in Houston, Texas. While playing Janet in a local stage production of The Rocky Horror Show, she was noticed by a director from ADV Films. Her start into the anime business occurred in 2004, when she was asked to be an extra in the series Gantz. By December 2006 she stated that Fuko from Gilgamesh was her favorite dub as she thought the character was "cute and wicked, but wicked in a good way". She eventually received starring roles as Himeko Katagiri in Pani Poni Dash and as Aoba Tsuzaki in Jinki: Extend through her work at ADV Films. Karbowski started voicing for Funimation in 2007 with a starring role as Mai in Itsudatte My Santa!. She also expanded her voice acting to other venues when she voiced her first video game character in 2007 as Pinkun in Akiba's Beat. ADV Films ultimately ceased operations in 2008, and several properties were transferred to Funimation. It was also during this time that she voiced the lead heroine Ayu Tsukimiya in Kanon after the title transfer had taken place. Karbowski has since dubbed dozens of characters including both major and minor roles through Funimation.

Karbowski has also had roles in films such as Celie in Up & Down, Susie in Puncture and a backpack girl in The Starving Games. She was slated to be a lead character Zax in the science fiction Code of Evil. Karbowski starred in the 2014 horror film Atrocity.


== Personal life ==
Karbowski was briefly hospitalized with a broken neck in 2010 due to a car accident.
She married Matthew Hernandez on October 11, 2013. They have two children.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Brittney Karbowski at IMDb
Brittney Karbowski on Twitter
Brittney Karbowski convention appearances on AnimeCons.com
Brittney Karbowski  at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Local voice actress Brittney Karbowski takes us behind the microphone at KPRC-TV via YouTube