Taus Makhacheva (Russian: Таус Османовна Махачева, born August 14, 1983) is a contemporary artist from Russia. She creates works that explore the restless connections between historical narratives and fictions of cultural authenticity. Often humorous, her art considers the resilience of images, objects and bodies emerging out of stories and personal experiences. Her methodology involves reworking of materials, landscapes and monuments, pushing against walls, opening up ceilings and proliferating institutional spaces with a cacophony of voices.


== Family ==
Grandfather: Rasul Gamzatov -  avar poet, prose writer, publicist, Soviet and Russian public and political figure, translator, the Laureate Stalin and Lenin Prizes, People's Poet of Dagestan ASSR, Hero of Socialist Labor (1923-2003).
Grandmother: Patimat Gamzatova -  Head of the Dagestan Museum of Fine Arts (1964-2000).
Mother: Patimat Gamzatova - art historian, Сorresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Arts, Honored Culture Worker of Dagestan Republic.
Father: Osman Makhachev  - Doctor of Medical Sciences, professor, Honored Doctor of the Russian Federation.


== Education ==
2011-2013 – MA Fine Art, Royal College of Art, London
2008-2009 –  New Strategies in Contemporary Art, The Institute of Contemporary Art, Moscow
2003-2007 – BA (Hons) Fine Art (Studio Practice & Contemporary Critical Studies), Goldsmiths College, University of London, London
2002-2003 – Foundation Diploma in Photography, London College of Communication, London
2000-2005 Russian State University for the Humanities, World Economy, Moscow


== Selected collections ==
Art Gallery of Ontario, Ontario
Centre Pompidou, Paris
Galerie für Zeitgenössische Kunst Leipzig
Gazprombank, Moscow
Kadist Art Foundation, Paris, San Francisco
Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles
Louis Vuitton Foundation, Paris
Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow
Museum of Modern Art, Antwerp
Musée cantonal des Beaux-Arts, Lausanne
National Centre for Contemporary Arts, Moscow
Pushkin Museum, Moscow
P. S. Gamzatova Dagestan Museum of Fine Arts, Makhachkala
Sharjah Art Foundation, Sharjah
Tate Modern, London
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
Uppsala Konstmuseum, Uppsala
Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven
Vehbi Koç Foundation, Istanbul
Videoinsight Foundation, Turin
YARAT Contemporary Art Space, Baku


== Prizes ==
2021 Kandinsky Prize, Media Art, shortlisted, Moscow
2021 Art Here 2021 Richard Mille Art Prize. Memory, Time, Territory, Abu Dhabi Louvre, shortlisted, Abu Dhabi
2019 Future Generation Art Prize, shortlisted, Victor Pinchuk Foundation, Kyiv
2018 Cosmoscow 2018, Artist of the Year, Cosmoscow Foundation for Contemporary Art, winner, Moscow
2016 Kandinsky Prize, Young Artist, Project of the year, winner, Moscow (as Super Taus)
2015 VI Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art Prize, winner, Moscow
2013 Future of Europe, winner, (GfZK) Galerie für Zeitgenössische Kunst, Leipzig
2013 Innovation Prize, Regional Project, shortlisted, National Centre for Contemporary Art, Moscow
2012 Innovation Prize, New Generation, winner, National Centre for Contemporary Art, Moscow
2011 Kandinsky Prize, Media Art, shortlisted, Moscow


== Selected solo exhibitions ==
2022
Space of Celebration, curated by Lucas Morin, Nora Razian, Jameel Arts Center, Dubai
2021
It’s Possible to Raise the Ceiling a Bit, curated by Hanne Hagenaars, Fries Museum, Friesland
2020
4`224,92 cm’2 of Degas, сurated by Nicole Schweizer, Musée cantonal des Beaux-Arts, Lausanne
Hold Your Horses, curated by Helen Watson and Melissa Burntown, The Tetley, Leeds
Sturdy Black Shoes, curated by Edit Molnar and Marcel Schwierin, Edit Russ Haus für Medienkunst, Oldenburg 

2019
Superhero Sighting Society, conceived by Sabih Ahmed and Taus Makhacheva, KADIST Foundation, Paris
Charivari, curated by Suad Garayeva-Maleki, Yarat Contemporary Art Space, Baku
D’une pierre, une montagne, curated by Nicolas Audureau, LE CAP - Centre d'arts plastiques de Saint-Fons, Saint-Fons
The Strong Ones, curated by Lýdia Pribišová, Hit Gallery, Bratislava
2018
Storeroom, curated by Christiane Berndes, Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven
BaidÀ, narrative projects, London
Baida, Althuis Hofland Fine Arts, the Gemma, Amsterdam
Tightrope, curated by Rebecka Wigh Abrahamsson, Uppsala Konstmuseum, Uppsala
2017
Cloud Caught on a Mountain, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow
Second World, Third Attempt, Leo Xu Projects, Shanghai
2015
Vababai Vadadai!, narrative projects, London

(In)sidenotes, curated by Rebecka Wigh Abrahamsson, Uppsala Konstmuseum, Uppsala
2014
Dagestan. Not for sale, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, artSumer, Istanbul
A Walk, A Dance, A Ritual, curated by Ilina Koralova, (GfZK) Galerie für Zeitgenössische Kunst, Leipzig
2013
What? Whose? Why?, curated by Daria Kirsanova, Raf Projects, Tehran
Story Demands to be Continued, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, Republic of Dagestan Union of Artists Exhibition Hall, Makhachkala
On Historical Ideals of Labour in the Country that Conquered Space, curated by Carlos Noronha Feio, The Mews Project Space, London 
The Process or Instance of Breaking Open, curated by Emmeli Person and Maria Kotlyachkova, Kalmar Konstmuseum, Kalmar
2012
City States, Topography of Masculinity, curated by Irina Stark and Kelly Klifa, the 7th Liverpool Biennial, LJMU Copperas Hill Building, Liverpool
Let Me Be Part of A Narrative, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, Paperworks Gallery, Winzavod, Moscow
2011
Affirmative Action (mimesis), curated by Marco Scotini, Laura Bulian Gallery, Milan
2010
Affirmative Actions, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, Panopticon Inutero, Moscow 
2009
A Space of Celebration, Pervaya Gallery, Makhachkala, Dagestan


== Selected group exhibitions ==
2022
In the heart of another country, curated by Dr Omar Kholeif, Contemporary Art of Deichtorhallen Hamburg, Hamburg
I'm Stepping High, I'm Drifting, and There I Go Leaping, curated by Weng Xiaoyu, Xiao Museum of Contemporary Art, Shandong
The Circus We Are, curated by Joanna De Vos, Namur, Four locations in Namur - Le Delta, musée Félicien Rops, Musée des Arts Anciens, Belgian Gallery, Namur
Hurting and healing. Let's imagine a different heritage, curated by Charles Esche, Tensta Konsthall, Stockholm
Migrations in Art – the Art of Migrations, curated by Danilo Vuksanović, Jelena Ognjanović and Luka Kulić, Novi Sad
Moving Woman, curated by Maria Lind, Smena, Kazan
2021
Biennial of Difficult Heritage, curated by Anton Valkovsky, Volgograd
One Point Five, curated by Stefanie Böttcher, Kunsthalle Mainz, Mainz
Hands, curated by Madhursee Dutta and Ala Younis, Akademie der Künste der Welt, Köln
Metamorphosis and Time of Mourning, curated by Daniela, Linda Dostálková, PLATO Ostrava, Ostrava
2020
Afterglow, Yokohama Triennale, curated by Raqs Media Collective, Yokohama 
Lahore Biennale 02: Between the Sun and the Moon, curated by Sheikha Hoor Al-Qasimi, Lahore 
2019
Cosmopolis #2: Rethinking the Human, curated by Kathryn Weir with associate Cosmopolis curator Ilaria Conti in collaboration with associate curators Charléne Dinhut and Zhang Hanlu, Centre Pompidou, Paris 
New Archive of Limited Edition Art (NATI), Shaltai editions exhibition, сurated by Irina Gorlova and Antonio Geusa, Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
Somewhere in Between, curated by Ulrika Flink, Boras Konstmuseum, Boras
Art Encounters Biennial, curated by Maria Lind and Anca Rujoiu, Timișoara
Where Water Comes Together with Other Water, curated by Adélaïde Blanc, Daria de Beauvais, Yoann Gourmel, Mat-thieu Lelièvre, Vittoria Matarrese, Claire Moulène, Hugo Vitrani, 15th Lyon Contemporary Art Biennale, Fagor Factory, macLYON, Lyon Museum of Contemporary Art, Lyon 
The Life of Things, curated by Maria Wills Londono in collaboration with Audrey Genois and Maude Johnson,16th MOMENTA Biennale de l’image, Galerie de l'UQAM, Montreal, Quebec 
Happiness is Born in the Guts, curated by Jagna Domżalska, Galeria Miejska Arsenal, Poznan 
The Art of Being Good, curated by Siim Preiman, Tallinn Art Hall, Tallinn 
After Leaving | Before Arriving, curated by Elisabeth Del Prete, Daniel Milnes, Lýdia Pribišová, Neringa Stoškutė and Alessandra Troncone, 12th Kaunas Biennial, M. K. Čiurlionis National Museum of Art, Kaunas 
Future Generation Art Prize, curated by Björn Geldhof and Tatiana Kochubinska, 58th International Art Exhibition - La Biennale di Venezia, collateral event, Palazzo Ca’ Tron, Venice 
The Keeper; To Have And To Hold, curated by Emer McGarry, The Model, Sligo
Future Generation Art Prize, curated by Björn Geldhof and Tatiana Kochubinska, Pinchuk Art Centre, Kyiv 
2018
Punk Orientalism, curated by Sara Raza, MacKenzie Art Gallery, Regina, Saskatchewan
Rituals of Signs and Metamorphosis, curated by Tarek Abou El Fetouh, Red Brick Art Museum, Beijing
Tomorrow Will Be Yesterday, curated by Andrey Misiano, ERTY gallery, Tbilisi
Alter Heroes Coalition, curated by Daria Khan, Mimosa House, London (as Super Taus)
Supernature in Two Parts: Part I, curated by Daria Khan and Mimosa House, Lisson Gallery, London (as Super Taus)
The Border, curated by Inke Arns and Thibaut de Ruyter, Goethe Institute at the Museum and Exhibition Complex of the Russian Academy of Arts, Ekaterinburg, Almaty and Tashkent
Beautiful World, Where Are You?, curated by Kitty Scott and Sally Tallant, 10th Liverpool Biennial, Liverpool
Transformatio. Contemporary Art of Dagestan, curated by Maria Filatova, Mardjani Foundation, Erarta Museum, Saint Petersburg
One Place After Another, curated by Viktor Misiano and Anna Zhurba, session IV of Viktor Misiano's "The Human Condition", Jewish Museum and Tolerance Centre, Moscow
The Planetary Garden. Cultivating Coexistence, curated by Bregje van der Haak, Andrés Jaque, Ippolito Pestellini Laparelli, Mirjam Varadinis, Manifesta 12, Palermo
Starting From the Desert, curated by Marco Scotini, 2nd Yinchuan Biennale, Museum of Contemporary Art Yinchuan, Yinchuan
Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More, curated by Katerina Gregos,1st Riga International Biennial of Contemporary Art, Riga
Soon Enough, Art in Action, curated by Maria Lind, Tensta Konsthall, Stockholm
2017
Life from My Window, curated by Andrey Misiano, Laura Bulian gallery, Milan
New Literacy, curated by Joao Ribas, 4 Ural Industrial Biennial, Ekaterinburg
The Travellers: Voyage and Migration in New Art from Central and Eastern Europe, curated by Magdalena Moskalewicz, Kumu Art Museum, Tallinn
The Border, curated by Inke Arns and Thibaut de Ruyter, Goethe Institute at Ioseb Grishashvili Tbilisi History Museum (Karvasla), Tbilisi
How To Live Together, curated by Nicolaus Schafhausen, Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna
Viva Arte Viva, curated by Christine Macel, 57th International Art Exhibition, La Biennale di Venezia, Venice
Space Force Construction, curated by Matthew Witkovsky, Richard and Ellen Sandor (Art Institute Chicago), Katerina Chuchalina with Anna Ilchenko (V-A-C Foundation), Peter Taub, Palazzo delle Zattere, Venice
1st Garage Triennial of Russian Contemporary Art, curated by Kate Fowle, Katya Inozemtseva, Snejana Krasteva, Andrey Misiano, Ilmira Bolotyan, Sasha Obukhova, Tatiana Volkova, Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow
The Border, curated by Inke Arns and Thibaut de Ruyter, Goethe Institute, Moscow, St. Petersburg, Krasnoyarsk, Kiev, Minsk, Dortmund
2016
The Withdrawal of the Red Army, curated by Ivan Galuzin and Lise Dahl, Northern Norway Art Museum, Blaker Old Dairy, Oslo
Why Won’t We Ask Again? Arguments, Counter-arguments and Stories, curated by Raqs Media Collective, 11th Shanghai Biennale, Power Station of Art, Shanghai
Social Calligraphies, curated by Magda Kardasz, Zachęta National Gallery, Warsaw
Millennials, curated by Mirjam Westen, Museum Arnhem, Arnhem
Performing the Landscape, curated by Lorenzo Fusi, TRUCK Contemporary Art, Calgary
VII Permanent Collection Display Interaction: Contemporary Artists Respond to MMOMA Collection, curated by Elena Yaichnikova, MMOMA, Moscow
The Travellers, curated by Magdalena Moskalewicz, Zachęta National Gallery, Warsaw
Museum ON/OFF, curated by Alicia Knock, Centre Pompidou, Paris
But Still Tomorrow Builds into My Face, curated by Nat Muller, Lawrie Shabibi gallery, Dubai
Lost in the Archive, curated by Inga Lace and Andra Silapetere, Exhibition hall Riga Art Space, Riga
Baroque, Galerie Fons Welter, Amsterdam
minus20degree Art & Architecture Winter Biennale, curated by Theo Deutinger and Heinz Riegler, minus20degree art and architecture biennale, Flachau, Austria.
2015
Otwock, Season 5: Silvohortiaromatherapy, curated by Kasia Redzis and Magda Materna, Otwock, held by Open Art Projects and Polish artist Mirosław Bałka, Muzeum Ziemi Otwockiej (Museum of the Otwock Land), Otwock 
How to Gather? Acting in a Center in a City in the Heart of the island of Eurasia, curated by Bart De Baere, Defne Ayas and Nicolaus Schafhausen, 6th Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art, VDNH, Moscow
The School of Kyiv, Kyiv Biennial, curated by Hedwig Saxenhuber and Georg Schollhammer, Visual Culture Research Center, Kyiv
Too Early, Too Late. Middle East and Modernity, curated by Marco Scotini, Pinacoteca Nazionale di Bologna, Bologna 
2014
Russian Performance: a Cartography of its History, curated by Yulia Aksenova and Sasha Obukhova, Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow 
Untitled... (Native Foreigners), curated by Andrey Misiano, Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow 
An Opera of Labour and Revolution, curated by Lanfranco Aceti and Susanne Jaschko, Kasa Gallery, Istanbul
Close and Far: Russian Photography Now, curated by Kate Bush, Calvert 22, London 
So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish, Lawrie Shabibi, Dubai
Sergey Parajanov. The Color of Pomegranate, сurated by Zaven Sargsyan, Vyacheslav Shmyrov, Katya Bochavar and Daria Khan, GROUND Solyanka Gallery, Моscow 
2013
Spaces of Exception, curated by Elena Sorokina and Jelle Bouwhuis, 5th Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art, special project, ARTPLAY Design Center, Moscow 
Nostalgia Nervosa, curated by Iliana Fokianaki, State of Concept, Athens
Sensible Action, curated by Beral Madra, Alanika 2013, National Museum of Republic Northern Ossetia-Alania, Vladikavkaz
No Water Tomorrow, curated by Alexey Maslyaev, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow
Love me, Love me not, curated by Dina Nasser-Khadivi, 55th International Art Exhibition - La Biennale di Venezia, collateral event, Venice
The Enchanted Wanderer, curated by Andrey Misiano, Chukotka Heritage Museum Center, Anadyr 
Re:emerge, Towards a New Cultural Cartography, curated by Yuko Hasegawa, 11th Sharjah Biennial, Sharjah
Looks Like Torture, curated by Nicholas Cohn and Amy Kisch, HERE Art Center, New York
Take a Look at Yourself, Who Do You Think You Are?, curated by Andrey Parshikov, Victoria Gallery, Samara
2012
I am who I am, curated by Olga Sviblova, Kunst im Tunnel, Dusseldorf, Germany
Quarantania, curated by David Thorp, Enclave, London
Animal Style, curated by Ilya Shipilovskikh, National Centre for Contemporary Arts, Ekaterinburg
Happiness is a Warm Gun, curated by Ekaterina Shadkovska, Rizzordi Art Foundation, Loft Raf, Saint Petersburg
Quarantania, curated by David Thorp, John Hansard Gallery, Southampton
Joyful Archipelago, curated by Olga Grotova, Guest Projects, London
Now&Then, Victoria Gallery, Samara
Migrasophia, curated by Sara Raza, Maraya Contemporary Art Centre, Sharjah
Génération P, Town Hall, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre
2011
Rewriting Worlds, curated by Peter Weibel, 4th Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art, ARTPLAY Design Center, Moscow
Expanded Cinema, curated by Olga Shishko, XII Media Forum of 33rd Moscow International Film Festival, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow 
Get Up and Run Away With It – About Love and the Impossible, curated by Nadine Wietlisbach, Palais Bleu Le-Lie, Trogen 
Greater Caucasus, curated by Irina Yashkova, PERMM Museum of Contemporary Art, Perm, Russia
North Caucasian Biennale, curated by Djamilia Dagirova, Pervaya Gallery, Makhachkala
Practice for Everyday Life, curated by David Thorp, Calvert 22, London
2010
History of Russian Video Art, Volume 3, curated by Antonio Geusa, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow
Zones of Alienation, curated by Marina Fomenko, LOT gallery, Lexington
Intimate Capital, curated by Andrey Parshikov and Alena Lapina, 2nd Moscow International Biennale for Young Art “Stop! Who goes there?”, Proekt Fabrika, Moscow
2009
Aluminium, curated by Leyla Akhundzadeh, 4th International Biennale of Contemporary Art, Baku 
Let Me Think!, curated by Stanislav Shuripa, the Parallel Program of the 3rd Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art, Red October, Moscow 
Really?, curated by Aleksandr Sokolov, the Parallel Program of the 3rd Moscow Biennale of Contemporary Art, Artplay, Moscow
Topography of Happiness: Russian Wedding from the 19th to the 21st Centuries, curated by Olga Sosnina, Tsaritsyno State Museum, Moscow
We Will Take the Lead From Now On, curated by Arseniy Zhilyaev and Maria Chekhonadskih, Voronezh Center for Contemporary Art, Voronezh
2008
Migration, curated by Daria Kamyshnikova, 1st  Moscow International Biennale for Young Art “Stop! Who goes there?”, Moscow Museum of Modern Art, Moscow
I Am Nature, curated by Stanislav Shuripa, 1st  Moscow International Biennale for Young Art “Stop! Who goes there?”, Contemporary City Foundation, Moscow
Documenting Possibilities, curated by Stanislav Shuripa, Valand School of Fine Art, Gothenburg
2006
Caucasica, curated by Giancarlo Vianello, Scuola Grande di S.Giovanni Evangelista, Venice
XII INTERBIFER International Biennale of Portrait, Drawings and Graphics 06, Tuzla


== Residencies ==
2019 Kadist Foundation, Paris
2018 SAM Art Project, Paris
2018 Aki Aora, Tulum
2016 Civitella Ranieri, Umbertide
2015-2016 Jan Van Eyck Academie, Maastricht
2015 Delfina Foundation, London
2013 Alanica, Art Symposium, Vladikavkaz


== Academic сareer ==


=== Artist talks ===
2022 Open meeting with Taus Makhacheva, as part of the Family Ethnography course by Elmira Kakabaeva
2022 Artist talk at M HKA, Antwerpen
2022 Virtual Class Visit, Princeton University
2022 Artist talk at Tselinny Center, Astana
2022 In Conversation: Taus Makhacheva and Madina Tlostanova, Jameel Arts Center
2022 Art Space SKLAD, online, Sukhumi
2021 Territory Festival, MMOMA, Moscow
2021 Fries Museum, Leeuwarden
2021 Blazar young art fair, Moscow
2021 Masters & Nova Art, online, Saint Petersburg
2021 The Tetley, online, Leeds
2020 British Higher School of Art & Design, Moscow
2020 School of Fine Art, History of Art and Cultural Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds
2019 LOOP Talks 2019, Barcelona
2018 Liverpool Biennial, Liverpool
2017  In - conversation with Andrey Kovalev, Garage Education Center, Moscow
2017 Talk for the members of the C-MAP Central and Eastern European group, Garage, Moscow
2016 Goldsmiths, London
2016 Open Studios, MMOMA, Moscow
2015 In - conversation with curator Kasia Redzisz, Institute of Contemporary Arts, London
2013 Yarat Contemporary Art Space, The International Mugham Center, Baku
2013 At the Crossroads: Conversation with Taus Makhacheva, Contemporary art from Caucasus, Sotheby’s, London
2012 Calvert22
2012 In - conversation with Sara Raza, Cultural Representations, Migrasophia, Maraya Contemporary Art Centre, American University of Sharjah, Sharjah
2011 British Higher School of Art & Design, Moscow


=== Invited guest lectures and studio visits ===
2022 Online program Possibilities and methods in international career, CEC ArtsLink
2022 Tashkeel Guest Mentoring as a part of Critical Practice Programme 2022
2021 Guest lecture and studio visit at St.Joost School of Art and Design
2021 Art and practices of hospitality, Vyksa
2021 Territory Festival, Moscow
2020 ICA Moscow (Institute of Contemporary Art)
2020 The Studio Visit, educational project, Worldwide online
2011- 2021 British Higher School of Art & Design, Moscow
2021 Fries Museum, Leeuwarden
2018 Liverpool Biennial, Liverpool
2012 Calvert 22


=== Lectures and teaching ===
2011- 2021 British Higher School of Art & Design, Moscow
2016 - 2017 Russian Institute of Theatre Arts – GITIS, Moscow
2014 The Art Department of Dagestan State Pedagogical University, Makhachkala
2013 Dagestan Art School n.a. M.A.Djemal, Makhachkala
2009 Moscow State University (elective course on the History of Performance)
2009 Pervaya Gallery, Makhachkala—Kaspiysk


=== Performative lectures ===
2019 The Superhero Summit, produced by KADIST in collaboration with ‘Cosmopolis #2: rethinking the human’, Paris
2017 Field Meeting Take 5: Thinking Projects - "Microbeads", curator Leeza Ahmady, Asia Contemporary Art Week, Asia Society Museum & SVA Theatre, New York
2015  3rd Garage international conference: "Where is the line between us?: Cautionary tales from now", Garage, Moscow (Super Taus)


=== Panel discussions ===
2022 Uzbekistan National Pavilion sessions ‘Decolonizing Data On the Myth of Machine Objectivity’
2018 The artist: What We Are Made Of, Cosmoscow, Moscow
2017 Contemporary art and contemporary art science, HSE University, Art and Design, Moscow
2015 Reaching out: (Beyond) the Caucasus, ArtBasel, Hong Kong
2014 Close and Far, Calvert22, The Courtauld Institute of Art, London
2011 Art schools: how to become an avant-garde artist, XV Art - Moscow International  Contemporary Art Fair, Moscow


=== Workshops ===
2022 Space of celebration, Super Taus workshop for children, Jameel Arts Centre
2021 Territory Festival, Moscow
2018 Soon Enough, art in action, Super Taus workshop for children, Tensta konsthall, Stockholm
2017 The Garage Triennial of Russian Contemporary Art, Garage Atrium, Moscow (Super Taus)
2012 South London Gallery, London


=== Conferences ===
2022 Tate and Institut National d’histoire de l’art (INHA) conference, Paris
2021 Art and practices of hospitality, Vyksa
2019 The Superhero Summit, produced by KADIST in collaboration with ‘Cosmopolis #2: rethinking the human’, Paris
2014 Beyond Moscow, Glocal art scene in Dagestan, NCCA, Moscow
2013 Performative aspects of masculinity, Makhachkala City Museum, Makhachkala


== Publications ==
Raza, Sara. Punk Orientalism: The Art of Rebellion. Dog Press, 2022
Dekker, Elsbeth; Schweige, Robbie. Beginning in the Middle. Jap Sam Books, 2022
Phaidon Editors. Prime - Art’s Next Generation, Phaidon Press, 2022
Tlostanova, Madina. Decoloniality of being, knowledge and feeling, Tselinnii, 2020
Schweizer, Nicole; Z. Rizvi Uzma, van Velsen, Vincent ed, Taus Makhacheva. 4`224,92 cm’2 of Degas, Fondation du Musée cantonal des Beaux-Arts, 2020
Burrows, Dani, Cezar Aaron ed. Politics of Food, co-published by Delfina Foundation and Sternberg Press, 2019
Kholeif, Omar. The Artists Who Will Change the World, Thames and Hudson, 2018
Makhacheva, Taus. Tightrope, V-A-C Press, Mousse Publishing, 2017
Makhacheva, Taus. Types du Caucase. Onestar Press, 2014
Makhacheva, Taus; Maslyaev, Alexey ed. Story Demands to Be Continued. Self-published, 2013
Amirsadeghi, Hossein; Vickery, Joanna ed. Frozen Dreams: Contemporary Art from Russia, Thames and Hudson, 2011


== Interviews ==
Artist of the Week: Taus Makhacheva, as a part of HANDS exhibition, Akademie der Kuenste der Welt, 2021
Interview with Taus Makhacheva, Part 5, Edith-Russ-Haus for Media Art, 2021
Interview by Masha Komarova,Glavstroy, 2021
Taus Makhacheva: My doubts became part of my method, Russian Art Focus, 2021
Taus Makhacheva: Hold Your Horses at The Tetley, The Tetly, 2020
Superhero Sighting Society, Kadist, Paris, 2019
Beauty School: a conversation with Taus Makhacheva, Art in America, 2018
The Art Newspaper Russia, 2018.08
The Art Newspaper Russia, Taus Makhacheva: art as a balancing act, 2018.07
Artists talk: Taus Makhacheva and Evgeny Antufiev, Harper’s Bazaar, 2016
Art Guide, 2015


== Articles ==
Wynants, Jean-Marie. The Circus we are à Namur. Les acrobaties de l'art, Le Soir, August 2022
Bidshahri, Yalda. Taus Makhacheva`s “A Space of Celebration”. ArtAsiaPacific, June 2022
Duplat, Guy. Bienvenue dans le grand cirque de la vie, La libre Belgique. May 2022
The artists. Taus Makhacheva. Daily Canvas. The Richard Mille Special Issue.
Sinha, Vamika. Art from the Fault Lines. Canvas, May-June, 2022
Dekker, Elsbeth; Schweiger, Robbie. Beginning in the middle. Mister Motley, April 2022
Beredian, Razmig. Russian artist Taus Makhacheva entwines the real with reveries in solo Dubai show. The National, March 2022
Ex, Nicole. Taus Makhacheva. See All This Art Magazine, No. 20, 2020/2021
Schellenberg, Samuel. Taus Makhacheva. Remodelage. Le courrier, March 2020
House, Arthur. Bread and Soviet circuses – a letter from Baku. Taus Makhacheva, Charivari’ installation, October 2019
Serafinowicz, Sylwia. Taus Makhacheva. narrative projects. ArtForum, December 2018
Verhagen, Marcus. Taus Makhacheva. BaidÀ. narrative projects. Art Monthly, November 2018
Jeffreys, Tom. In Search of the Ridiculous: Taus Makhacheva’s Performative Follies. Frieze, 7 October 2018
Sutton, Kate. Taus Makhacheva. Openings. ArtForum, February 2016
Ahmady, Leeza. From Central Asia to the Caucasus. In conversation with Taus Makhacheva. Ibraaz, March 2015
Pertenava, Lali. Taus Makhacheva. ArtForum, February 2014
Bailey, Stephanie. Her Dagestan. ArtAsiaPacific No.87, 2014
Laia, Joao. Taus Makhacheva. Frieze magazine No.160, 2014
Tolstova, Anna. Continuation of heart and hand. Taus Makhacheva in Makhachkala. Kommersant No.187(5218), 2013
Avdeev, Maxim. One day with Taus Makhacheva, Art Chronika No. 4, 2012
Scotini, Marco. Strategies of Camouflage. Taus Makhacheva’s actions. ArteCritica No.67, 2011
Chekhonadskikh, Maria. Shots into the Sand by Taus Makhacheva. Moscow Art Magazine No.81, 2010
Gamzatova, Patimat. Karakul by Taus Makhacheva. ANTENNAE No.4, 2007


== Links ==
Vimeo channel


== References ==