Superficial deposits (or surficial deposits) refer to geological deposits typically of Quaternary age (less than 2.6 million years old) for the Earth. These geologically recent unconsolidated sediments may include stream channel and floodplain deposits, beach sands, talus gravels and glacial drift and moraine.  All pre-Quaternary deposits are referred to as bedrock.


== Types and history ==
There are several types of superficial deposit, including raised beaches and brickearth. These were formed in periods of climate change during the ice ages.  The raised beaches were generally formed during periods of higher sea level, when ice sheets were at a minimum, and the sand and shingle deposits can be seen in many low cliffs. The brickearth is originally a wind-blown dust deposited under extremely cold, dry conditions but much has been re-deposited by flood water and mixed with flints.
Superficial deposits were originally recorded only onshore and around the coast where they were laid down by various natural processes such as action by ice, water and wind. More recently offshore deposits have been mapped and may be separate sea-bed sediments.
Most of these superficial deposits are unconsolidated sediments such as gravel, sand, silt and clay, and onshore they form relatively thin, often discontinuous patches. Almost all of these deposits were formerly classified on the basis of mode of origin with names such as, 'glacial deposits', 'river terrace deposits' or 'blown sand'; or on their composition such as 'peat'.
Geology databases contain information on the properties of superficial deposits. Geological survey houses these 
Geology databases. This information can be used for a number of different purposes in farming and forestry, including avoiding erosion, assessing growing conditions, gauging risks in terms of nutrient leaching and release of toxic substances, planning site preparation, road construction, felling and extraction operations, judging accessibility etc.


== Geological Survey ==
Each country and is some countries each state or province has an organization with a superficial deposits database.
Some of the geological survey are:

United States Geological Survey
California Geological Survey
Arkansas Geological Survey
Arizona Geological Survey
Delaware Geological Survey
Oklahoma Geological Survey
Indiana Geological and Water Survey
Kansas Geological Survey
Louisiana Geological Survey
Utah Geological Survey
Michigan Geological Survey
Minnesota Geological Survey
Pennsylvania Geological Survey
Kentucky Geological Survey
British Geological Survey
Geological Survey of Sweden
Geological Survey of Norway
Geological Survey of Finland
Mexican Geological Survey
Zimbabwe Geological Survey
Bureau de Recherches Géologiques et Minières - French Geological Survey
Geological Survey of Canada in French Géologie des formations superficielles du Canada.
Geological Survey of Newfoundland and Labrador
Ontario Geological Survey
Alberta Geological Survey
Geological Survey of Japan
Geoscience Australia
Geological Survey of Western Australia
Geological Survey of Queensland
Geological Survey of South Australia
Geological Survey of Victoria
New Zealand, GNS Science, a Crown Research Institute
Geological Survey of India
China Geological Survey
Geological Survey of Slovenia
Geological Survey of Austria
Colombian Geological Survey
Geological Survey of Ireland
Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland
Geological Survey of Pakistan
Geological Commission of the Cape of Good Hope
Geological Survey of Tanzania
Geological Survey of Belgium
Geological Survey of Bangladesh
Saudi Geological Survey
Albanian Geological Survey
State Geologic and Subsoil Survey of Ukraine


== See also ==
Alluvium – Loose soil or sediment that is eroded and redeposited in a non-marine setting
Colluvium – Loose, unconsolidated sediments deposited at the base of a hillslope
Diluvium – Deposits created as a result of catastrophic outbursts of Pleistocene giant glacier-dammed lakes


== References ==