Device Improvement and Circuit Performance Evaluation of complete 
SiGe Double Gate Tunnel FETs  

Bahniman Ghosh1, Rahul Mishra1 
1Department of Electrical Engineer ing , Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur.  Kanpur, Uttar  Pradesh, India . (208016) 
                      email : ramis@iitk.ac.in  
 
 

Abstract  –  In  recent  part  extensive  simulation  work  has  already  been  done  on 
TFETs.  However  this  is  limited  to  device  performance  analysis. Evaluation  of  circuit 
performance  is a  topic  that  is  very  little  touched. This  is due  to  the non availability of 
compact  models  of  Tunnel  FETs  in  the  commercial  simulator.  In  our  paper  for  the 
first  time  we  perform  the  circuit  analysis  of  tunnel  FETs  (extended  channel  TFETs), 
we  test  them  over  basic  digital  circuit.  We  generate  the  TFET  models  by  using  the  
model  editor  in Orcad. Extensive  circuit  simulation  is  then  performed  by  using  these  
models  in  the  Pspice  circuit  design.   Performance  of  extended  channel  double  gate 
TFET  is evaluated on  the grounds  of power and delay  in  inverter, nand gate, nor gate 
and  ring  oscillator.  Before  that  we  perform  device  analysis  of    double  gate  extended 
channel  TFETs,  extended  channel  has  been  tried  before  on  SOI  TFETs  we  try  it  for 
the  first  time on double gate Si1-xGex TFETs. We even look at  the effect of  introducing 
Si  layer.  The  performance  of  this  device  is  compared  for  different  Ge  mole  fraction 
and also with MOSFETs 
Keywords: TFETs, bandgap, extended channel tunnel FET , SiGe, dynamic power  
PACS: 85.30.DE 

 

 

I. Introduction 

Study  on  tunnel  FETs  have  proved  them  to  be  better 
than  conventional  MOSFETs  in  terms  of  steeper  sub 
threshold  swing,  higher  Ion/Ioff  ratio, 
lower  power 
consumption  (dynamic  and  leakage)  and  their  scaling  is 
not  limited  by  the  quantum  mechanical  effect  unlike  the 
MOSFETs  [1]-[10].  Tunnel  FETs  are  basically  low 
power  device.  They  work  on  the  principle  of  band  to 
band  tunneling,  from  the  valence  band  in  source  side  to 
the conduction band in channel side  [1]. The  tunneling is 
initiated  with  the  application  of  gate  voltage,  which 
lowers  the  tunneling  distance  between  the  two  bands. 
Use  of  SiGe  layer  in  the  source  side  of  tunnel  FETs  to 
increase  the  on  current  has  already  been  proposed  [9]-
[12].    Similarly  use  of  high  K  dielectrics  like  HfO2  
(K=22) and double gates have also helped  in      increasing 
the  on  current  of  TFETs  [1]-[3].  Increasing  Ge  mole 
fraction  in  SiGe  layer  leads  to  higher  on  current  by 
reducing  the  tunneling  barrier  due  to  lower  band  gap  of 
SiGe  [9].  An  alternate  to  this  is  to  use  SiGe  throughout 
the  body.  However with  increasing Ge  content  the  Ioff  of 
such  TFETs  also 
increases  proportionally  which 
counteracts  its  advantage.  A  way  to  tackle  this  problem  
was  proposed  in  [13]  and  was  very  nicely  demonstrated 
by  experimental  results.  However  it  dealt  with  SOIs  and 
SiGeOIs.  In our paper  for  the  first  time we provide a  full 
insight on  the use of  this technique  (extended channel)  in 
double  gate  Si1-xGex  tunnel  FETs  and  then  perform 
circuit  simulation  of  these  TFETs.  Double  gate  has  the 
advantage of increased Ion over SOI. We also optimize  

 
 
length  of  the  extended  channel  and  the  Si  layer  which 
was  used  to  further  improve  the  performance.  We 
compare  extended  tunnel  FETs  with  different  Ge  mole 
fraction  on  the  grounds  of  Ion,  Ioff,  sub  threshold  swing 
etc.  We  also  compare  the  performance  of  these  TFETs 
with  MOSFETs  of  similar  dimension  and  identical 
threshold voltage. In later section we model tunnel FETs  
and  use  them  in  some  basic  digital  circuits. We  compare 
performance  of  these  tunnel  FETs  for  various  Ge  mole  
fraction  and  also  compare  them  with  corresponding 
MOSFETs. 
A  brief  version  of  this  paper  has  been  accepted  in 
“International  conference  on  nanotechnology  research  and 
commercialization”  (ICONT  2011),  Sabah,  Malaysia.  This 
paper  contains  more  than  30  percent  additional  material 
compared to the conference paper. 

II.  Device structure and simulation  

A  tunnel  FET  is  basically  a  P-i-N  junction  device.  
With  the  n  side  serving  as  drain,  p  side  as  source  and 
channel  in  intrinsic  region  in  case  of  n -channel  TFETs 
[1].  Gates  are  there  on  top  of  intrinsic  region  with  a 
dielectric  in  between.  In  case  of  extended  channel  tunnel 
FET the gate does not cover the complete channel region. 
Fig.  1  shows  the  extended  channel  tunnel  FET.  The 
simulated  tunnel  FET  is  a  complete  SiGe  tunnel  FET. 
The  substrate  is  P  doped  with  carrier  concentration  of 
1016 cm-3. Gaussian profile is used in the source and drain 
region. The source region is P doped with peak density of   

 

                   

     (1) 

In  the  above  equation  Eg  is  the  band  gap,  m*  is  the 
effective carrier mass. 
 is the energy range over which 
tunneling  can  take  place.  tox  and  tsi  are  dielectric  and 
body  thickness  respectively.  Rest  of  the  symbols  has 
their  usual  meanings.  Thus  it  is  clear  from  equation  (1) 
that  tunneling  current  can  be  changed  by  changing  band 
gap.  Effective  masses  are  taken  as  m c=0.32mo  and 
mv=0.81mo for Si1-xGex with x < 0.85 and mc=0.22mo and 
mv=0.34m0 for  Si1-xGex with x > 0.85 [16].  

 
Fig.  2. O ff  state  and On  state  band  diagram  for  a SiGe  extended TFET  
for  Ge=0.8.  Cross-section  taken  2.5  nm  from  gate  dielectric  interface . 
For  off  sta te  Vds=  1  volt  .  Vgs=  0  volt.  For  On  state  Vgs=Vds=1  volt.   

Fig.  3.  O ff  state  band    diagram  of  normal  (right)   and  extended  channel 
tunnel  FET  (left).  Cross-section  taken  2.5  nm  from  the  gate  dielectric 
interface. For off state Vds= 1 volt . Vgs= 0 volt.  

 To compare between  the extended channel TFET and 
the normal TFET we look at the off state diagram of both 
devices  in Fig. 3  for Ge mole  fraction of 0.8.  In a normal 
tunnel  FET  as  we  increase  the  Ge  mole  fraction  the 
tunneling  barrier  in  the  off  state  at  the  drain -channel 
junction  decreases  resulting  in  high  off  current[9]-[11]. 
From  Fig.  3  we  see  that  this  drain -channel  tunneling 
barrier  is  0.01  µm  for normal  tunnel  FET. However with 
the  introduction  of  extended  channel  we  are  able  to 
increase  this  tunneling  barrier  to  0.02  µm  and  hence  we 
are able to reduce the electric field near the drain -channel 
junction  [12].  This  result  in  a  lower  OFF  curren t 
compared to normal tunnel FET. 
Before  moving  on  to  studying  the  characteristics  of 
extended  channel  tunnel  FET  we  look  at  the  optimized 
channel  length  to  get  the  desired  performance.  Because 
we  are  introducing  the  extended  channel  to  improve  the 
off  current,  we  look  at  the  variation  of  this  off  current 

Fig.1. 
 

Extended 

channel 

SiGe 

N -tunnel 

FET  

1020  cm-3  and  with  characteristic  length  of  0.55  nm. The 
drain  region  is  N+  doped  with  peak  density  of  1018  cm-3 
and  characteristic  length  of  0.55  nm.  For  a  P-TFET  n-
region  is  heavily  doped  compared  to  p-region.  Optimum 
device   parameters used  in all  the subsequent simulations 
are  given  in  table  1. Metallic  gate with workfunction  4.3 
ev  is  used  in  case  of  N  channel  tunnel  FET.  All 
simulations  were  carried  out  using  medici  version   Y-
2006.06  A  band  to  band  tunneling  model  was  used  to 
account  for  the  tunneling.  In  all  the  semiconductor 
regions  where  the    current  continuity  equations  are 
solved  band-to-band  tunneling  generation  is  computed 
[14].  The  drift  diffusion  model  for  current  transport  is 
used.  A  PTFET  also  has  similar  structure  with  N-type 
being the source and P-type as drain. 

Table I. Device Parameter  of NTFET used in simulation 

Ge mole fraction                                               0 to 1  

          Peak Source Doping (atoms/cm3)                          1020 

Peak Drain Doping (atoms/cm3)                            1018 

Substrate Doping (atoms/cm3)                                1016 

Channel Length                                                  60nm 

Dielectr ic thickness                                             3 nm 

Body thickness                                                   10 nm 

Gate work function                                         4.3 eV 

 

III.  Operation 

As  the  name  suggests,  a  tunnel  FET  works  on  the 
principle  of  electron  tunneling.  Fig.  2  shows  the  on  and 
off  state  diagram  of  a  simple  TFET  with  Ge  mole 
fraction  of  0.8.  As  clear  from  the  on  state  diagram, 
tunneling  occurs  at  the  source  -  channel  junction as  soon 
as 
the 
tunneling  barrier 
reaches  below 
required 
minimum.  The 
tunneling  current  depends  on 
the 
probability  of  electron  tunneling  from  valence  band  in 
the  source  side  to  the  conduction  band  in  the  channel. 
More    the  probability  of  tunneling  more  is  the  current. 
Among  various  other  factors  tunneling  probability  is 
dependent  on  the  tunneling  width  (Fig.  2).  Tunneling 
width  will  decrease  as  we  decrease  the  band  gap  and 
hence it will increase the tunneling probability. Therefore 
SiGe  with  high  Ge  content  has  higher 
tunneling 
probability  due  to  lower  band  gap.  Equation  (1)  governs 
the tunneling current in a tunnel FET [15] . 

SioxoxsiggttEeEmI)2/3(3*24exp 

Fig. 4 Off current vs  length of extended channel  for Vds= 1 V, Vgs= 0 V, 
Ge=0.8 

Fig. 6  Drain current vs Gate voltage for extd. channel TFET. Vds=1 V.  

 

Fig. 5  Drain current vs Gate voltage for   Vds= 1 V and Ge=0.8 

 with  length  of  extended  channel.  Fig.  4  shows  the 
variation. Clearly  the  off  current  saturated  to  a minimum 
for  a  extended  channel  length  of  30nm.  To  keep  the 
device  dimension  minimum  we  choose  this  width  for 
subsequent  simulations.  In  the  next  section  we  present 
the simulation result for optimized tunnel FET. 

IV. Simulation Results 

Now we move on to comparing various characteristics 
of our extended channel TFET. 

A.  Transfer  characteristic 
First  we  compare  the  Id  –  Vg  characteristic  of  normal 
tunnel  FET  and  extended  channel  TFET  for  Ge  mole 
fraction  of  0.8  for  both  case  in  Fig.  5.  Fig.  6  compares 
the  Id-Vg  curves  of  extended  channel  tunnel  FETs  for 
various  Ge  mole  fractions.  Clearly  increasing  Ge  mole 
fraction  decreases  the  tunneling  width  due  to  decreasing 
band  gap  and  hence  increases  the  drain  current.  On 
current  (at Vgs=  0.5 V, Vds=  1 V)  is  2.66×10-5 A/µm    for 
Ge=0.8  compared  to  2.029×10-7  A/µm  for  pure  silicon. 
Increasing  mole  fraction  of  Ge  also  increases  the  off 
current. Off current is 1.09×10-12 A/µm for Ge=0.8 which 
is  much  higher  than  the  off  current  value  of  1.9×10-18 
A/µm  for pure silicon. Fig. 7 compares  the off current of 
normal  and  extended  channel  tunnel  FET  for  various Ge 
mole  fractions.  Cleary  extended  channel  tunnel  FETs 
have  advantage  over  normal  tunnel  FETs  at  higher  Ge 
mole  fraction.  Off  current  of  norma l  TFET  is  1.8×10-8 
A/µm  for  Ge=0.8  compared  to  1.09×10-12  A/µm  for  
extended channel  tunnel FET. As discussed earlier this is 
due  to  their  larger  tunneling  width  at  drain -channel 
junction  and  hence  reduced  off  current  as  clear  from  the 
figure. Fig. 8 depicts the  Ion-Ioff  ratio  for various Ge mole 
fraction  for  extended  channel  tunnel  FETs  and  similar 
size  MOSFETs.  TFETs  have  clear  advantage  over 
MOSFETs with their high Ion-Ioff ratio, this is due to their 
lower  off  current. We  don’t  not  compare  the  Ion/Ioff  ratio 
of TFETs and MOSFETs for different Ge mole  

Fig. 7. Ioff vs Ge composition for  Vds= 1 V. Vgs= 0 V 

Fig.  8  Ion-Ioff  ratio  vs  Ge  composition  for   MOSFETS  and  extended  
channel TFET s. On sta te (Vds  = 1 V, Vgs =  0.5 V ). O ff   state(Vgs  = 0)  
 
fraction.  However  we  take  a  particular  Ge  mole  fraction 
and  then  compare  the  performance  of  TFETs  and 
corresponding  MOSFETs.  In  short  we  are  comparing 
performance  of TFETs  and MOSFETs  for  same material 
and not looking at their trend with change of material. 

A.  Threshold Voltage 
We  define  threshold  voltage  as  the  gate  voltage  at 
which drain current is equal to 10-7 A/um. As we see 

in  Fig.  9  the  threshold  voltage  decreases  with  increasing 
Ge  mole  fraction. This is due to the increasing current of 
the  extended  TFET  with  increasing  Ge  mole  fraction. 
Threshold  voltage  is  0.18  V  for  extended  TFET  with 
Ge=0.8  compared  to  0.46  V  for  pure  silicon   (gate  work 
function  =  4.3  eV).  This  threshold  voltage  is  also 
dependent on the work function of the gate. Fig 10 shows 
the  threshold  variation  with  gate  work  function   for  an 
extended channel tunnel FET with Ge=0.8. As clear from 
the  figure  threshold  voltage  decreases  with  decreasing 
work  function. Desired  threshold voltage can be set  for a 
given  device  by  adjusting  the  workfuction  of  gate. 
However the subthreshold current must be kept in mind. 

B.  Subthreshold swing  
We  now  compare  the  performance  of  MOSFETs  and 
TFETs  in  term  of  subthreshold  swing  for  different 
germanium mole  fraction. We  however  do  don’t  look  at  
the  variation  of  subthreshold  swing  with  Ge  mole 
fraction as MOSFETs and TFETs behave differently with 
varying  Ge  mole  fraction.   Performance  of  MOSFETs  is 
limited by their 60mv/decade subthreshold swing. TFETs 
show a subthreshold swing below 60mV/dec thus making  

 

 

Fig. 12 Extended SiGe TFET with Si layer  (1 nm)  

Fig. 9 Threshold voltage vs Ge composition for ext. channel TFETs.  

Fig.10. Threshold voltage vs Gate workfunction. Ge=0.8   

Fig. 13 O ff current vs Si layer width for  ext. channel TFET. Ge = 0.8  

 

 

 

Fig.11 Average subthreshold slope vs Ge mole fraction.  
 
them a better switching device [1]. We take the definition 
of  average  subthreshold  swing  as  given  in  equation  (2) 
[15].  Here  Vt  is  threshold  voltage,  Voff  is  the  voltage  at 
which  TFET  is  off.  I vt  is  the  drain  current  at  threshold 
(10-7 A/µm in our case) and Ioff is the current in off state. 
 

            (2) 

Fig.  11  shows  variation  of  subthreshold  swing 
calculated  using  above  formulae  with  Ge  mole  fraction 
for an extended channel TFET and a similar dimension  
MOSFET  with  their  threshold  voltage  matched.  Clearly 
TFETs  show  much  lower  subthreshold  swing  compared 
to  MOSFETs  (for  Ge=0.8,  subthreshold  swing  is  24 
mV/Dec  for  TFET  compared 
to  92  mV/Dec  for 
MOSFET)  and  this  subthreshold  swing  decreases  with 
increasing Ge mole  fraction but saturates after Ge=0.5 as 
the  effect  due  to  decreasing  Vt  is  compensated  by 
increasing off current. 

C.  Introduction of Si layer 
Moving  towards  further  decreasing  the  off  current we 
introduce  a  layer  of  silicon  at  the  drain -channel  interface 
in  a  SiGe  TFET  with  high  Ge  mole  fraction.  Fig.  12 
shows the new structure. This is similar to what was done 
in SiGeOI in [13]. We try the same thing in a double gate 
extended  channel  tunnel  FET.    The  combined  effect  of 
extended channel and Si layer further decreases the off 

Fig.14 Ioff vs Ge mole fraction for Vds =  1 V. Vgs =  0 V 

current of SiGe TFET while keeping the on current same. 
The  variation  of  Ioff  with  Si  layer  width  is  shown  in 
Fig.13  for  Ge  mole  fraction  of  0.8.  Care  must  be  taken 
that  Si  layer  does  not  extend  till  the  source-channel 
junction  as  it  will  deteriorate  the  on  current  in  that  case. 
The  off  current  saturates  to  a minimum  for  a  Si width  of 
0.8  nm. We  select  Si  width  of  1  nm  for  our  simulations.  
Fig.  14  compares  the  Ioff  of  the  extended  channel  TFET 
with and without   Si  layer. For a Ge mole  fraction of 0.8 
TFET  with  Si  layer  has  off  current  of  4.93×10 -14  A/µm 
compared to the 1.09×10-12 A/µm of the one without Si. 

V. TFET modeling and circuit Simulation 

In the further sections whenever we talk about TFETs we 
refer  to  the  extended  channel  TFETs  (without  Si  layer). 
We  move  towards  analyzing  the  circuit  performance  of 
TFETs in  terms of  their power dissipation and delay. We 
use    Cadence  OrCAD  V  16.0  [17].  However  before  that 
we must  have  appropriate models  of TFETs  so  that  their 
circuit  can  be  simulated.  Since  the  commercial  circuit 
simulators  don’t  provide  us  with  compact  model  of 
TFET  we  have  to  generate  it  by  ourselves.  For  this 
purpose  we  use  the  model  editor  available  in  OrCAD. 
Now,  TFETs  like  MOFETs  are  three  terminal  device,  
namely the source, drain and gate. With the help of curve 
fitting  capability  of  model  editor  we  fit  the  current-
voltage,  transconductance  and  capacitance  curves  of  a  
MOSFET  to  that  of  a  TFET .  The  corresponding  values 
for  extended  TFET  were  extracted  using  the  device 
simulator  (medici)  and  then  fed  in  corresponding  tables  

offvtofftIIVVSloglog 

and  then  the  curves  were  generated.  The  various  curves 
that  we  got  show  good  resemblance  with  the  original 
device  curves  in  the  area  of  interest. Thus  this MOSFET 
model  with  its  curves  fit  to  that  of  extended  channel 
TFET  was  used  for  circuit  simulation   using  OrCAD 
PSpice. From now on we call it as the TFET model. 
Now  the  circuits  in  hand  have  both  the  P  channel 
TFET  and  N  channel  TFET.  The  current  voltage 
characteristic of these devices should be matched for best  
performance  of      circuits.  Now  a  PTFET  is  similar  to 
NTFET but with P side as drain and N side as source and 
N side heavily doped compared  to P  [6]. Unlike NTFET, 
the 
threshold  voltage  of  PTFET  decreases  with 
increasing gate work function. Thus the threshold voltage 
and  the  doping  level  are  adjusted  to  make  the  current  –
voltage  characteristic  of  PTFET  and  NTFET  symmetric. 
Fig.  15  shows  one  such  match  for  SiGe  P  and  NTFET 
with Ge mole fraction of 0.8. 

 
Fig. 15 Nearly  symmetr ic  I-V  characteristic of P  channel and N channel 
TFET.  For   PTFET ,  source  doping  (N+)  :  1020   cm-3,  drain  doping  (P+) : 
1018 cm-3. Gate work function 4.8 eV. Rest of the parameters  same a s in 
table 1. Parameters for NTFET same a s in table 1.  
Thus models  of  PTFETs  and NTFETs were  generated 
for  various Ge mole  fraction  (0  ,  0.2  ,  0.4  ,  0.6  ,  0.8  and 
1).  And  these  models  were  then  used  for  circuit 
simulation.  The  circuits  that  are  analyzed  are  loaded 
inverter,  nand  gate  and  nor  gate  and  5  stage  ring 
oscillator.  The  next  section  compares 
the  circuit 
performance  of  TFETs  with  different  Ge  mole  fraction 
and  also  compares  them  with  corresponding  similar 
dimension  double  gate  MOSFET  [18].  The  threshold 
voltage  of MOSFETs  and TFETs  are  also  kept  the  same 
for fair comparison.   

VI. Circuit Simulation Results 

The models of  tunnel FETs were used  in simulation of 
simple  inverter,  nand  gate,  nor  gate  and  5  stage  ring 
oscillator.  The  performance  of  circuits  was  evaluated  on 
the grounds of dynamic power, leakage power and delay.  
All  the  circuit  simulations  are  done  at  Vdd  =  0.5  V.  The 
inverter,  nand  gate  and  nor  gate  were  loaded  with  a  1pF 
load (much greater than internal capacitances).  

A.  Delay 
A very general expression  for dependence of   delay  on 
various  parameters  in  a  digital  circuit  is  given  by 
equation  3.  Clearly  delay  depends  on  both  total  output 
capacitance  and  current.  Since  for  the  case  of  inveter, 
nand  and  nor   gate  we  use  a  load  capacitance  which  is 
much  greater 
than 
internal  capacitances  (for  both 
MOSFET  and  TFET).  For  instance  load  capacitance  is 
1pf compared  to output  internal capacitance of   ~1  fF  for 

a  complete  Ge  TFET.  Therefore  total  capacitance  is 
constant  for  different  devices  and  is  nearly  independent 
of  the  internal  capacitance.  Hence  the  delay  is  only 
dependent on current. However  for a ring oscillator  there 
is  no  external  capacitance  therefore  the  capacitance  in 
delay  expression  changes  for  differen t  devices  hence 
delay  is  dependent  on  both  capacitance  (internal)  and 
current. 

               

               (3)  

Fig.  16  compares  the  delay  of  TFETs  for  various  Ge 
mole  fraction  in  a  loaded  inverter  ,  nand  and  nor  gate. 
Clearly  the  delay  decreases  with  increasing  Ge  mole 
fraction  due  to  the  increasing  current.  For  an  inverter 
delay  is  0.014  µs    for  complete  Ge  TFET  compared  to 
1.87  µs  for  a  complete  Si.  Fig.  17  compares  delay  of  
TFET  circuits  with  MOSFET  circuits.  MOSFETs  are 
slightly  advantageous  over  TFETs  due  to  their  lower  
delay  as  clear  from  Fig.  17.    Delay  of  MOSFET 
invertercircuit  for  Ge=0.8  is  0.0058  µs  compared  to  
0.014  µs  for  TFET  inverter  circuit  for  same  Ge  mole 
fraction. The scene changes when we analyze  the  5 stage 
ring oscillator, Fig. 18. In this case the delay is dependent 
on  both  the  internal  capacitance  and  the  current,  since 
there  is no  load  capacitance.  For  a  5  stage  ring  oscillator 
the  TFETs  outperform MOSFETs  because  in MOSFETs  

Fig. 16 Delay vs Ge composition for TFET . Vdd = 0.5 V.  

Fig. 17 Delay vs Ge composition. Vdd = 0.5 V 

 

Fig. 18  Delay vs Ge composition. Vdd = 0.5 V 

CurrentCapacKDelay.. 

effect  due  to  increasing  current  is  compensated  by  the 
increasing  capacitance  hence 
their   delay 
is  more 
compared  to  TFET  circuit.  However  among  TFETs  for 
different  Ge  mole  fraction  the  delay  of  5  stage  ring 
oscillator  decreases  with  increasing  Ge  mole  fraction 
because  the  increase  in  current  is  more  compared  to  the 
increase in capacitance.       

B.  Dynamic power  

Fig. 22 Static power  vs Ge composition. V dd =  0.5 V 

Dynamic  power  is  the  power  dissipated  during  the 
switching from on state to off state and vice versa. Fig.19 
compares  the  dynamic  power  dissipated  for  a  loaded 
TFET  circuits.  Clearly  dynamic  power  dissipated  by 
inverter,  nand  and  nor  gate.  Clearly  dynamic  power 
MOSFETs  circuits  is  more  than  TFET  circuits  due  to 
increases  with  increasing  Ge  mole  fraction.  Maximum 
their  higher  current.  For  Ge=0.8,  MOSFET  inverter 
dynamic  power  is  given  by  equation  4.  Since  maximum 
circuit  has  dynamic  power  of  2.14×10-6 W    compared  to 
frequency  is  limited  by  delay.  And  delay  is  inversely 
8.4×10-7  W  for  corresponding  TFET.  Finally  Fig.  21 
proportional  to  current.   Finally  we  arrive  at  equation  5 
compares  the  dynamic  power  dissipated  in  5  stage  ring 
which  is  independent  of  capacitance. Hence  the  dynamic 
oscillator   for  both  MOSFET  and  TFET.  For  a  ring 
power  dissipated  increases  with  Ge  mole  fraction  due  to 
oscillator  also  the  dynamic  power  is  more  for MOSFET 
increase  in  current  with  Ge  mole  fraction.  For  instance 
circuits  since  dynamic  power  is  only  dependent  on 
dynamic power for inverter with Ge=0 is 6.6×10-9 W                             
current. 

                           (4)  

A.  Leakage Power 

 

 (5) 

        

                    

                      

compared  to  8.4×10-7 W  for  pure Ge  inverter.    Fig.  20 
compares  the  dynamic  power  of  MOSFET  circuits  with  

Fig. 19 Dynamic power vs Ge composition for TFET . Vdd = 0.5 V  

Fig. 20 Dynamic power vs Ge composition. Vdd = 0.5 V  

Leakage power or static power is the power consumed by 
the  circuit  when  it  is  not  switching,   i.e.,  when  it  is  in 
steady state. Static power is mainly constituted by the off 
current  or  leakage  current  of  the  devices  in  circuits.  We 
compare  the  static  power  dissipated  by  TFET  circuits 
with  that  of MOSFET  circuits  in  Fig.  22. Clearly TFETs 
are  highly  advantageous  over  MOSFETs  when  it  comes 
to  static  power  dissipation  due  to  their  very  low  off 
current compared to MOSFETs. However this off current 
in TFETs increases with  increasing Ge mole  fraction due 
to  lower  band  gap  of  SiGe  with  high  Ge  content  and 
hence  the  leakage  power  also  increases  with  Ge  mole 
fraction. 

VII.   Conclusion  

In  this  paper  we  saw  the  advantage  of  extended 
channel SiGe TFET over normal   double gate TFET. We 
were  able  to  decrease  the  off  current  by  gate  under  lap 
and  thus  were  able  to  take  advantage  of  the  lower  band 
gap  of  Ge  to  increase  the  on  current.  We  also  studied 
various characteristics of this TFET and compared it with 
similar  dimension  MOSFETs.  We  then  evaluated  the 
circuit  performance  of  these TFETs  for  various Ge mole 
fractions  and  also  compared  them  with  corresponding 
MOSFETs.  We  saw  that  TFETs  outperform  MOSFETs 
in  circuits with no  or  very  low  load. However  for  a high 
load  MOSFETs  are  advantageous  in  terms  of  delay.  
TFETs  outscore MOSFETs  in  terms  of  leakage  power  in 
any  circuit.    Performance  of  TFETs  can  be  improved 
further by using lower band gap materials and by  finding 
ways to decrease the off current. 
 

Fig. 21 Dynamic power vs Ge composition. Vdd = 0.5 V  

                 

 

References 
[1]  K.Boucart  and  A.M.  Ionescu,  Length  scaling  of  double  gate 
tunnel  fet  with  high  K  gate  dielectric,  Solid-State  Electronic  
51(2007) 1500-1507 

2min...ddVCfreqkpowerdelayCkCfreqk....2min1currentkCCcurrentk...22 

[2]  K.Boucart  ,A.M.  Ionescu, Double  gate  tunnel FET with  ultra  thin 
silicon body and high K dielectric,. ESSDERC  2006:383-386 
[3]  K.Boucart  ,A.M.  Ionescu,  Double  ga te  tu nnel  FET  high  K  gate 
dielectric,  IEEE Trans Electron Dev 2007;54:1725-33 
[4]  P.F.  Wang  et  al.,  Complementary  Tunneling  Transi stor    for  low 
power  application,  Solid-State Electronics 48(2004) 2281 -2286 
[5]  N.  Arakawa,  Y.Otaka,  K.Shikki,  Evaluation  of  barr ier  height  and 
thickness  in  tunneling  junctions  by  numerical  ca lculation  on 
tunnel probability, Thin Solid Films 505 (2006) 67 -70 
[6]  Bhuwalka  K,  Born  M,  Sedlmaier  S,  Schulzee  J ,  Eisele  I ,  P-
channel  tunnel  field-effect  transistors  down  to  sub-50  nm  channel 
lengths, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics  2006;45;3106-9 
[7]  Mathias  Born  et.al,  Tunnel  FET:  a  cmos  device  for  high 
temperature  applications,  Proc.  25 th  international  conference  on 
microelectronics, 14-17may, 2006.  
[8]  P. Zhao, J. Chauhan and J.Guo, Computational  study  of tunneling 
transistor  ba sed  on  grapheme  nanor ibbon,  NANO  Letters  2009. 
Vol.9, No.2, 684-688i  
[9]  N. Patel  ,  A.  Ramesha, S.Mahapatra, D rive  current  boosting  of  n -
type 
tunnel 
fet 
  with 
strained  SiGe 
layer  at  source,  
Microelectronics Journal 39(2008) 1671 -1677 
[10]  Bhuwalka  K,  Schulzee  J,    Eisele  I,  Performance  enhancement  of  
vertical  tunnel  field  effect  transistor  with  SiGe  in  the  p+  layer ,  
Japanese  Journal  of  Applied  Physics,Vol.43,  No.  7A,  2004, 
pp.4073-4078  
[11] D.  Kim,  Y.Lee,  Low  power  circuit  design  using  ba sed  on  hetro 
junction  tunneling  transistors  (HETTs),    ISLPED’09  Aug,2009 
San Francisco, California, USA  
[12] Hasanali  G.  Virani  and  Anil  Kottantharayil,  Optimization  of  
Hetero  Junction  n-channel  Tunnel  FET  with  High-k  Spacers,  
2009  2nd 
international  workshop  on  electron  devices  and 
semiconductor technology 
[13] F.Mayer,  C .  Le  Royer  et.al,  Impact  of  SOI ,  Si1-xGexOI  and  GeO I  
substrates  on  CMOS  compatible  Tunnel  FET  performance, 
Electron  Device  Meeting  2008.  IEDM  2008.  IEEE  International. 
15-17 Dec. 2008. 
[14] Taurus  Medici,  Medici  User  Guide,  Version  Y -2006.06,  June 
2006 

 
[15] Sneh Saurabh  and M.  Jagadesh  Kumar,  Impact  of Strain  on Drain 
Current and Threshold Voltage  of Nanoscale Double Gate Tunnel 
Field  Effect  Transistor:Theoretical  Investigation  and  Analysis, 
Japanese  Journal  of Applied Physics   48(2009), Vol.48,  paper  no. 
064503 
[16] Ioffe  Physico-Technical  Institute.  Electronic  archive,  New 
Semiconductor  Materials.  Characteristics  and  Properties  
(http://www.ioffe.ru/SVA/NSM/Semicond/SiGe/bandstr.html ) 
[17] OrCad PSpice,A/D   User’s Guide, (Part number  60-30 -636) 
[18] Saurabh Mookerjea  et.al, On Enhanced Miller  Capacitance  Effect 
in  Internal  Tunnel  Transistor s,  IEEE  Electron  Device  Letters, 
Vol.30, No. 10. October 2009, 1102 -04.  
 
 

Acknowledgments 
 
We  would 
thank  Ministry  of  Human 
to 
like 
Resource  Development 
(MHRD), 
India, 
for 
sponsoring  our  research.  A  brief  version   of  this 
paper has been accepted in “International conference 
on  nanotechnology  research and  commercialization” 
(ICONT  2011),  Sabah,  Malaysia.  This  paper 
contains  more  than  50  percent  additional  material 
compared to the conference paper. 
 
                                                        
 

