
Charge pumping by magnetization dynamics in magnetic and semi-magnetic tunnel

junctions with interfacial Rashba or bulk extrinsic spin-orbit couplings

Farzad Mahfouzi,1 Jaroslav Fabian,2 Naoto Nagaosa,3, 4 and Branislav K. Nikoli´c1, 3, ∗
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716-2570, USA

2Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Regensburg, D-93040 Regensburg, Germany

3Cross-Correlated Materials Research Group (CMRG) and Correlated Electron

Research Group (CERG), RIKEN-ASI, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan

4Department of Applied Physics, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan

We develop a time-dependent nonequilibrium Green function (NEGF) approach to the problem
of spin pumping by precessing magnetization in one of the ferromagnetic layers within FIF mag-
netic tunnel junctions (MTJs) or FIN semi-MTJs in the presence of intrinsic Rashba spin-orbit
coupling (SOC) at the FI interface or the extrinsic SOC in the bulk of F layers of finite thickness
(F-ferromagnet; N-normal metal; I-insulating barrier). To express the time-averaged pumped charge
current, or the corresponding dc voltage signal in open circuits that was measured in recent exper-
iments on semi-MTJs [T. Moriyama et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 067602 (2008)], we construct
a novel solution for the double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGFs. The two energy arguments of
NEGFs in this representation are connected by the Floquet theorem describing multiphoton emis-
sion and absorption processes. Within this fully quantum-mechanical treatment of the conduction
electrons, we find that: (i) only in the presence of the interfacial Rashba SOC the non-zero dc pump-
ing voltage in FIN semi-MTJ can emerge at the adiabatic level (i.e., proportional to the microwave
frequency); (ii) a unique signature of this charge pumping phenomenon, where the Rashba SOC
resides within the precessing F layer thereby participating in the pumping process, is dc pumping
voltage that changes sign as the function of the precession cone angle; (iii) unlike conventional spin
pumping in the absence of SOCs, where one emitted or absorbed microwave photon is sufficient to
match the exact solution in the frame rotating with the magnetization, the presence of the Rashba
SOC requires to take into account up to ten photons in order to reach the asymptotic value of
pumped charge current; (iv) disorder within FIF MTJs can enhance the dc pumping voltage in
the quasiballistic transport regime; (v) the extrinsic SOC in FIF MTJs causes spin relaxation and
eventually the decay of dc pumping voltage which becomes negligible when the ratio of F layer
thickness to the spin-diffusion length is around five.

PACS numbers: 85.75.-d, 72.25.Mk, 72.10.Bg, 73.40.-c

I.

INTRODUCTION

The spin pumping by precessing magnetization is a
phenomenon where the moving magnetization of a sin-
gle ferromagnetic layer, driven by microwave radiation
under the ferromagnetic resonance conditions (FMR),
emits spin current into adjacent normal metal layers.1
The emitted spin current is pure2 in the sense that it is
not accompanied by any net charge flux. This effect is
termed "pumping" because it happens in the absence of
any dc bias voltage, and together with closely related adi-
abatic quantum pumping of charge3 or spin4 observed in
quantum dots, falls in the category of problems where an
open quantum system (i.e., a finite many-particle system
in contact with particle reservoirs) is exposed to time-
dependent periodic externals fields.

Since angular momentum loss carried by emitted pure
spin current adds extrinsic contribution to Gilbert damp-
ing, spin pumping has initially been observed1,5,6 as an
increased broadening of FMR spectra upon switching
from a single ferromagnet (F) layer to FN multilayers
(N-normal metal). Therefore, it is also an essential in-
gredient to understand7 critical current switching in ex-
periments8 on spin-transfer-torque-driven magnetization
dynamics.
In fact, spin pumping can also be viewed

as the Onsager reciprocal phenomenon9 of spin-transfer
torque10 (STT) in which spin current of large enough
density injected into a ferromagnetic layer either switches
its magnetization from one static configuration to an-
other or generates a dynamical situation with steady-
state precessing magnetization.

Recent vigorous experimental efforts have focused on
the direct detection of pure spin current generated by co-
herent macrospin precession in both ferromagnetic met-
als11 -- 13 and insulators14,15 by converting it into dc volt-
age signal. For example, the experimental techniques
employed for this purpose include the inverse spin Hall
effect11 or the second static F layer as detector within a
magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ),12 as well as the precess-
ing F layer itself which can generate voltage13 at the FN
interface by detecting the backflow spin current (due to
spin accumulation6 driven by pumping into the N layers
thinner than the spin-diffusion length).
The origin of the voltage signal of spin pumping in
FIF MTJs can be easily understood16 -- 18 as a two step
process: (1) the magnetization dynamics of the left F
layer pumps pure spin current across the tunnel barrier
(I-insulator); (2) the pumped spin current is then filtered
by the analyzing right F layer whose magnetization is
static. This generates charge current or, equivalently, dc

pumping voltage in an open circuit.16 -- 18 This voltage is
proportional to the frequency ∝ ω of microwaves due
to adiabatic nature of pumping (in the adiabatic regime,
formally ω → 0 since energy of microwave photons ω is
smaller than other relevant energy scales in ferromagnetic
solids).
On the other hand, surprisingly large voltage signal
∝ ω observed19 in FIN semi-MTJs, which do not con-
tain the second analyzing F layer, has remained un-
explained in virtually all recent theories16 -- 18,20 of spin
pumping in MTJs. Some of these theories17,18 actu-
ally predict tiny voltage signal which being non-adiabatic
∝ (ω)2 is the second-order effect.

Also, there exists several orders of magnitude dis-
crepancy between underestimated voltage signal of spin
pumping in FIF MTJs obtained in the scattering the-
ory,16 experimental data,12 and overestimated voltage
signal obtained in the rotating frame approach17,18 or the
tunneling Hamiltonian formalism combined with semi-
classical modeling of the interplay of spin diffusion and
self-consistent screening around interfaces.20 This can be
traced to different device setups where scattering ap-
proach was applied to MTJs assuming zero16 spin ac-
cumulation in the F layers modeled as semi-infinite leads
(justified through assumption that spin-flip rate in F is
larger than the tunnel rate), while unrealistically large
bulk17,18 or interfacial20 spin accumulation appears in
the other two approaches.

The MTJs employed in spin pumping experiments12,19
contain F layers of nanoscale thickness whose short spin-
diffusion length21 can be modeled by sufficiently strong
extrinsic spin-orbit scattering. Most importantly, the
very recent experiments22 have unveiled a possibility of
strong Rashba spin-orbit coupling (SOC) at the FI in-
terface due to structural inversion asymmetry of the mul-
tilayered device within which such interfaces reside (e.g.,
Rashba SOC was detected in NFI multilayers, but not
in the NFN ones22).

However, SOCs have been traditionally neglected in
a variety of approaches to spin and charge pumping
by magnetization dynamics.1,16,18,23,24 The SOCs in the
bulk or on the surface of ferromagnetic materials play
crucial role in other phenomena, such as the anomalous
Hall effect25 or the tunneling anisotropic magnetoresis-
tance26 -- 31 (TAMR). Moreover, the study of the interplay
between SOC and STT has been recently initiated9,32 -- 34
through theoretical proposals35 and experimental real-
izations22,36 that exploit SOCs for STT-driven magneti-
zation reversal of a single F layer with greatly reduced
critical current required when compared to traditional
spin valves or MTJs with two non-collinear magnetiza-
tions.10

In the "standard model"1,7 of spin pumping in mag-
netic multilayers containing many7 F and N layers, the
magnitude of pumped spin current by FN interfaces is
computed quantum-mechanically via the Brouwer scat-
tering formula37 which then serves as the boundary con-
dition for the spin-diffusion equation7 or enters into

2

the so-called circuit theory21 where device is split into
nodes of characteristic size smaller than the spin-diffusion
length. Thus, in these frameworks SOCs enter only phe-
nomenologically through finite spin-diffusion length (a
spin can be flipped by SOC and magnetic impurities in
N or F layers, as well as by magnon scattering in the F
layers).

However, these approaches are not applicable to MTJs
since the spin accumulation is not well-defined in the
insulating barrier.7 Moreover, even the magnitude of
pumped current cannot be obtained from the "standard
model" formula,1 governed by the interfacial spin-mixing
conductance21 g↑↓, when strong SOC is present imme-
diately at the interface which renders g↑↓ an ill-defined
quantity.
The recent alternative description24 of spin pumping
in FN multilayers, based on nonequilibrium Green func-
tion (NEGF) expressions for the local spin and charge
current densities, has encompassed both the earlier con-
sidered38 nonlocal diffusion of the spin accumulation at
the FN interface generated by magnetization precession
and the effective field described by the "standard model"
(where spin accumulation does not build at the interface
since spin-flip relaxation rate is assumed to be sufficiently
larger than the spin injection rate). However, this frame-
work24 has treated SOCs only in the N layer away from
the precessing F layer in order to analyze how each of
these two pumped spin currents can be converted into
charge current by the inverse spin Hall effect due to the
extrinsic or intrinsic SOCs. That is, in this theory SOCs
are not essential for the discussion of spin pumping effect
itself.

We note that other groups have also recently identi-
fied the importance of adding SOCs explicitly into the
description of spin and charge pumping by magnetiza-
tion dynamics. For example, a generalized scattering
theory of adiabatic charge pumping by a single precess-
ing F layer within NFN junctions containing SOCs has
been formulated in Ref. 9. Also, the pumping of current
of magnetic monopoles and the associated (via Amp`ere
law) charge current flowing in the plane of the Rashba
SO-coupled interface (rather than perpendicular to it as
is the focus of our study) between the precessing F layer
and a nonmagnetic layer has been predicted in Ref. 39.
Here we develop a NEGF-based quantum transport
its propagation, and
theory of spin current pumping,
conversion into electrically measurable signals in FIF
and FIN junctions depicted in Fig. 1. The junctions
are described by the microscopic time-dependent (due to
precessing magnetization of one of the F layers) Hamil-
tonian which is tailored to take into account nanoscale
thickness of F layers within which we include terms de-
scribing disorder and extrinsic SOC in the F layers, as
well as possibly strong Rashba SOC at the FI inter-
faces. Our theory starts from the equations of motion
generated by such Hamiltonian for NEGFs which de-
pend on two time variables, and then finds a computa-
tionally efficient solution to such equations which physi-

3

tonian in order to reproduce properties of MTJs and
semi-MTJs employed in experiments,12,19 such as their
tunneling magnetoresistance, diffusive nature of trans-
port within the F layers, finite spin-diffusion length in
F layers and strong interfacial Rashba SOC. Section III
discusses NEGF equations of motion and how to solve
such equations after converting them into algebraic ones
via double Fourier transform.
In this section we also
employ clean FIF junctions (with semi-infinite or finite
thickness F layers) as a test bed to compare our theory
to the scattering formulas for pumping in MTJs derived
in Ref. 16, as well as to previously developed40 solution
to double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGF equations us-
ing continued fractions. In Sec. IV we discuss properties
of time-averaged pumped charge current and the corre-
sponding dc voltage signal in open circuits for clean FIN
and FIF junctions as a function of the strength of in-
terfacial Rashba SOC. The effect of disorder in F and
I layers, as well as the extrinsic SOC within F layers,
on the dc pumping voltage in FIF MTJs is discussed
in Sec. V. We conclude in Sec. VI. Readers seeking to
understand physical effects of SOC on microwave-driven
MTJs may wish to start with Sec. II and then jump to
Sec. IV and Sec. V, while those interested in theoretical

II. MTJ DEVICE SETUP AND ITS

HAMILTONIAN

The MTJ and semi-MTJ we study are illustrated in
Fig. 1(a) and (b), respectively. Each atomic monolayer
shown in Fig. 1 is modeled on the square tight-binding
lattice with single s-orbital per site. Since disorder is in-
cluded as random potential in real space, atomic mono-
layers are of finite size 20 × 20 sites. This can also be
viewed as the cross section of a supercell which is re-
peated periodically in the transverse direction,21 while
its size is sufficient to allow one to compute all quan-
tities at the Γ point (i.e., without the need to perform
k-point sampling).41 We have checked that dc pumping
voltage remains constant as one increases cross section
size beyond 20 × 20 sites.

The ferromagnetic layers consist of dF = 50 such
monolayers, so that their thickness is (cid:39) 15 nm (assum-
ing typical lattice spacing a (cid:39) 3 A), which closely mim-
ics F layers employed experimentally.12,19 The thickness
of the insulating barrier is dI = 5 atomic monolayers.
The finite-size FIF or FIN multilayer is connected to
macroscopic reservoirs via two semi-infinite ideal (i.e.,
disorder, spin and charge interaction-free) N leads to
form a two-terminal device required for both NEGF and
scattering theory analysis.

The general time-dependent Hamiltonian describing

FIG. 1: (Color online) (a) FIF MTJ and (b) FIN semi-MTJ
with precessing magnetization of a single F layer are modeled
on a simple cubic finite-size tight-binding lattice attached to
semi-infinite ideal (disorder and interaction free) N leads. The
thicknesses of the ferromagnetic layers and thin insulating
barrier is measured using the number of atomic monolayers
dF and dI , respectively. For example, dF = 8 and dI = 4
in the illustration, while in the actual calculations we use
dF = 50 and dI = 5 monolayers of cross section 20×20 lattice
sites. The interfacial Rashba SOC due to structural inversion
asymmetry of the junction is included in the last monolayer
of the F slab that is in direct contact with the tunnel barrier
I. The F layers can also include disorder modeled as a random
on-site potential and the corresponding extrinsic SOC, while
binary alloy disorder in the I layer models AlOx-type tunnel
barrier.

cally describes processes where a specific number of mi-
crowave photons is absorbed or emitted by propagat-
ing electrons in the course of pumping. This solution
for time-dependent NEGFs allows us to obtain time-
averaged total charge current in the N leads of the junc-
tions shown in Fig. 1 or the corresponding dc pumping
voltage in the corresponding open circuits. The formulas
which we derive for pumped currents are also applicable
to any problem where a quantum-mechanical system is
exposed to periodic time-dependent external field, inde-
pendently of its frequency (i.e., including both adiabatic
and non-adiabatic regimes) or amplitude (i.e.,
includ-
ing both perturbative and non-perturbative regimes), as
long as electron-electron, electron-phonon and electron-
magnon interactions can be neglected.

The paper is organized as follows. In Sec. II we dis-
cuss how to tune parameters of the microscopic Hamil-

mZθωRashba SOCmZθωmRashba SOC(a)(b)FIFIFexeyezthese two devices can be written as

H(t) =

εiδss(cid:48) − ∆i
2

mi(t) · [ σ]ss(cid:48)

†
isci(cid:48)s(cid:48) + iλESO
c

(cid:19)
(cid:88)

ii(cid:48),ss(cid:48)

†
iscis(cid:48)
c
†
isLii(cid:48) · [ σ]ss(cid:48) cis(cid:48)
c

(cid:18)
(cid:88)
(cid:88)

(cid:104)ii(cid:48)(cid:105),ss(cid:48)

(cid:88)

i,ss(cid:48)
−γ

+

(cid:104)ii(cid:48)(cid:105),ss(cid:48)

†
istss(cid:48)
c

ii(cid:48) ci(cid:48)s(cid:48).

(1)

Its time dependence stems from the unit vector mi(t)
along the local magnetization direction within the left
F layer, which is assumed to be spatially uniform and
steadily precessing around the z axis with a constant cone
angle. The value of angle θ is controlled by the input
microwave power (typically θ (cid:46) 20◦ in the recent experi-
†
ments19). The operators c
iσ (ciσ) create (annihilate) elec-
tron with spin σ at site i = (ix, iy, iz), and γ is the nearest
neighbor hopping which sets the unit energy scale. The
coupling of itinerant electrons to collective magnetization
dynamics is described through the material-dependent
exchange potential ∆i, where σ = (σx, σy, σz) is the vec-
tor of the Pauli matrices and [σ]ss(cid:48) denotes the Pauli
matrix elements.

The disorder within F layers can be introduced
the uniformly distributed random variable
using
i ∈ [−W/2, W/2] which models isotropic short-range
εF
static impurity potential. To account for the proper-
ties of amorphous AlOx tunnel barrier in MTJs and
semi-MTJs employed in the recent spin pumping experi-
ments,12,19 the on-site potential on I monolayers is chosen
i = Ub ± δUb where random fluctuations δUb mimic
as εI
binary alloy disorder.42

The impurity potential in the F layers also generates
extrinsic SOC, as described by the third sum in Eq. (1).
This can be viewed as the lattice version43 of the Thomas
term λ(σ × p) · ∇Vdis in the Pauli-Schrodinger equation
so that

(Lii(cid:48))x =

νν(cid:48)(εF

i+νey

− εF

i+ν(cid:48)ez

)δi,i(cid:48)+νey+ν(cid:48)ez . (2)

(cid:88)

ν,ν(cid:48)=±1

That is, on the tight-binding lattice the extrinsic SOC
acts as additional spin-dependent hopping between both
nearest neighbor and next nearest neighbor sites. Here
(ex, ey, ez) are the unit vectors along the x, y, z axis re-
spectively and λESO = λ/4a.

The fourth sum in Eq. (1) is the tight-binding rep-
resentation43 of the Rashba SOC written in terms of a
generalized nearest neighbor hopping term that acts as
2 × 2 Hermitian matrix in the spin space:

(cid:26) −iγRSO σz (i = i(cid:48) + ey)

+iγRSO σy (i = i(cid:48) + ez)

tii(cid:48) =

,

(3)

continuous

version

The
SOC,
αRSO( σ × p) · ex/, has been traditionally studied
in the
electron gases
(2DEGs) within semiconductor heterostructures with

two-dimensional

the Rashba

context of

of

4

FIG. 2:
(Color online) The Fano factor of the zero-
temperature and zero-frequency shot noise vs. the disorder
strength W in transport through N slab with static disorder
or F slab with both static disorder and the corresponding ex-
trinsic SOC of strength λESO = 0.04γ. Both slabs consists of
50 monolayers (containing 20 × 20 atoms per cross section)
which are connected to two semi-infinite ideal N leads.

structural
inversion asymmetry in the growth direc-
tion.44 Nevertheless, several experiments have recently
reported evidence of the Rashba SOC-induced split-
ting of the surface states in both non-magnetic and
magnetic metals using angle-resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy.45 The very recent transport experiments22
have demonstrated Rashba SOC-induced STT of a
single thin F layer embedded between two asymmetric
interfaces. For example, such effect was observed in
PtCoAlOx multilayers, but not in the inversion sym-
metric ones PtCoPt. The experiment of Ref. 22 has
also utilized heavy atoms and surface oxidation to create
strong out-of-plane potential gradient in PtCoAlOx
junctions and enhance the interfacial Rashba SOC.

This motivates the introduction of the Rashba SOC
term of strength γRSO into the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1),
which we set to be non-zero only on the last monolayer of
the precessing F layer that is in the direct contact with
the first monolayer of the tunnel barrier, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. Note that the exact location of the interfacial
Rashba SOC eventually requires fitting the Hamiltonian
parameters to first-principles analysis.28 -- 30

A. How to tune Hamiltonian parameters to

reproduce properties of MTJs used in experiments

The diffusive transport regime within F or N layers
is defined semiclassically by the requirement that mean
free path (cid:96) is smaller then the thickness of such layers,
(cid:96) (cid:28) dF or (cid:96) (cid:28) dN . In quantum transport calculations,
the easiest way to select proper range of values for the
disorder strength W which ensures diffusive regime is to

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.00.00.10.20.30.4F (dF=50, D=2g, lESO=0.04g)  Fano FactorDisorder Strength W/g1/3N (dN=50)compute the Fano factor F = S/2eI of the shot noise
whose zero-temperature and zero-frequency noise power
is S. For the diffusive metallic wires, F = 1/3 is universal
in the sense of being independent of the impurity distri-
bution, band structure, and shape of the conductor.46 In
Fig. 2 we plot the Fano factor with increasing disorder
strength W for both conventional disordered N layer at-
tached to two ideal semi-infinite leads and F layer of the
same dimensions with both disorder and extrinsic SOC.
Using Fig. 2, we select W = 3γ to ensure semiclassical
diffusive transport regime.

Note that spin-dependent effects on the shot noise
are reveled only when spin-polarized current is injected
and the corresponding spin-resolved Fano factors are de-
fined.47 Thus, for unpolarized injected charge current,
both F and N layers have virtually the same Fano factor
in the diffusive regime, while larger Fano factor for the
F layer in the quasiballistic regime is due to increased
scattering at the NF interfaces because of non-zero ∆.

1. Extrinsic SOC in the bulk of F layers

through phenomenological

In both N and F layers, spin-flip scattering will destroy
nonequilibrium spin accumulation which is typically
accounted21
spin-diffusion
length Lsf . Over this length scale, an injected spin ac-
cumulation loses its polarization so that Lsf in ferromag-
nets defines the magnetoelectrically active region of F
layer in contact with N layer. In metallic ferromagnetic
materials, Lsf ranges21 from 5 nm in Ni80Fe20 (permal-
loy), which is often employed as precessing F layer in spin
pumping experiments,12,19 to 50 nm in Co.

To understand how to tune the strength λESO of the
extrinsic SOC term in Eq. (1) in order to generate dif-
ferent experimental situations in F layers of nanoscale
thickness, such as Lsf < dF or Lsf > dF (where spin-flip
processes essentially become unimportant), we compute
the spin density matrix48 of collected transported spins in
the right lead 2 after fully spin-polarized charge current
is injected from the left lead 1 across the F layer:

↑↑
21]nm2
↓↑
↑↑
21]∗
21]nm
nm[t

[t

[t

↓↑
↑↑
21]∗
21]nm[t
↓↑
21]nm2
[t

nm

(cid:19)

(4)

(cid:18) [t

M(cid:88)
(cid:0)1 + Pout · σ(cid:1) .

e2/h
↑↑
21 + G

n,m=1

↓↑
21

ρout =

=

G

1
2

21

The elements of the transmission matrix tss(cid:48)
in this
21 ]nm2 for spin-
formula determine the probability [tσσ(cid:48)
σ(cid:48) electron incident in lead 1 in the orbital conducting
channel m(cid:105) to be transmitted to lead 2 as spin-σ elec-
tron in channel n(cid:105). Therefore, such amplitudes also de-
(cid:80)M
termine the corresponding spin-resolved conductances,
21 ]nm2. The spin density matrix
n,m=1 [tss(cid:48)
Gss(cid:48)
21 = e2
makes it possible to extract the detected current polariza-
tion vector Pout = (P out
) whose magnitude
P out = Pout gives the so-called current polarization

x , P out

, P out

h

y

z

5

FIG. 3: The decay of current polarization along the diffusive
F layer with static disorder of strength W = 3γ and the ex-
trinsic SOC of strength λESO = 0.1γ. The F layer is attached
to two semi-infinite ideal N leads where charge current which
is 100 % spin-polarized along the z-axis, Pin = (0, 0, 1), is in-
jected from the left N lead and P out
is computed in the right
N lead for F layer of thickness dF . The unit vector of the
magnetization in F is either parallel (solid line) or antiparal-
lel (dashed line) to the z-axis. The inset shows spin-diffusion
length as a function of λESO when F layer is replaced by diffu-
sive N layer with different strengths of extrinsic SOC, where
each value of Lsf is extracted by fitting exponentially decaying
function to P out

vs. dN curves.

z

z

measured experimentally.49 The matrices tσσ(cid:48)
21 and ρout
are computed for the two-terminal NFN device where F
layer with static magnetization pointing along the z-axis
and disorder of strength W = 3γ is embedded between
two semi-infinite N leads [this means that the number of
conducting channels M in Eq. (4) is M = 400 for the
selected cross section of 20 × 20 sites].

z

The measured current polarization of permalloy at
room temperature ranges from P = 0.32 to P = 0.5, de-
pending on the experimental technique employed.49 Since
we find only tiny fluctuations of Px, Py ∼ 10−3 in the
presence of non-zero ∆ and λESO, we use P out = P out

as the measure of current polarization. We first tune
∆ = 2γ of the F layer with λESO = 0 to obtain P out (cid:39) 0.5
at the Fermi energy EF = −3γ. Then we compute the de-
cay of P out
z with increasing length of the diffusive F layer
with non-zero λESO, as shown in Fig. 3. For sufficiently
 (cid:39) 0.5. On
thick F layer, these curves saturate at P out
the other hand, the same calculation for the diffusive N
layer with non-zero λESO gives usual exponentially de-
caying P out
vs. dN curves due to spin diffusion, whose
fitting establishes the correspondence between λESO val-
ues used in our study and microscopically determined
spin-diffusion length Lsf . The dependence Lsf ∝ 1/λESO
shown in the inset in Fig. 3 is expected for the diffusive
transport regime.

z

z

With ∆ and EF specified in this fashion to ensure that

020406080-0.50.00.51.00.000.040.080.120.16010203040m (cid:231)(cid:231)ezm (cid:231)(cid:231)-ezlESO=0.1gN  Current Polarization PoutzThickness of F Layer dFF Spin Diffusion Length LsfExtrinsic SO Coupling lESO/g6

FIG. 5: (Color online) The magnitude Pout of the spin-
polarization vector of outgoing charge current in the right N
lead after fully Pin = 1 spin-polarized current is injected
from the left N lead traversing a monolayer with the Rashba
SOC of strength γRSO. The spin-polarization vector Pin can
point along three different axes of the coordinate system in
Fig. 1, where Pin = (0, 1, 0) and Pin = (0, 0, 1) are parallel
to the Rashba monolayer while Pin = (1, 0, 0) is orthogo-
nal to the Rashba monolayer. The direction of Pout remains
collinear with Pin, as illustrated in the inset.

values encountered in experimental devices,22 we com-
pute the so-called out-of-plane TAMR coefficient for
FIN semi-MTJ which is defined as31

TAMR (φ) =

R(φ) − R(0)

R(0)

,

(6)

for the device setup illustrated in Fig. 4(a). In dc trans-
port measurements of TAMR, the magnetization direc-
tion in F layer provides a control knob orienting the spin,
while the magnetic anisotropy is determined by the inter-
face symmetry rather than by the symmetry of the bulk
materials. Here R(0) is the resistance of semi-MTJ when
static magnetization of its F layer is parallel to the x-axis
as the direction of transport in Fig. 4(a), and R(φ) is the
junction resistance when magnetization is rotated by an
angle φ with respect to the x-axis within the xz-plane.
Figure 4(b) shows TAMR(φ) at fixed Rashba SOC,
while the maximum TAMR(φ = 90◦) vs. the strength
of Rashba SOC is plotted in Fig. 4(c). Compared to the
weak Rashba SOC in 2DEGs where typically γRSO (cid:39)
0.01γ, the interfacial Rashba SOC in semi-MTJs has to
be rater strong (as achieved in the recent experiments22)
in order to generate observable TAMR. Since the inter-
facial SOI is linear in momentum, TAMR vanishes at the
first order in γRSO after averaging over the Fermi sphere.
However the ferromagnet contains local exchange field
and a net transfer of angular momentum occurs at the
second order, so that TAMR ∝ γ2
RSO. This region of
small TAMR occurs for γRSO (cid:46) 0.4γ in Fig. 4(c), beyond
which higher order processes start to play the role and
TAMR increases faster with increasing γRSO.

FIG. 4: (Color online) (a) The setup for the measurement
of the out-of-plane TAMR in FIN semi-MTJ, defined by
Eq. (6), as a function of the angle φ between the static magne-
tization of the F layer and the transport direction (the x-axis).
In panel (b), the Rashba SOC at the F monolayer in contact
with the tunnel barrier I is fixed at γRSO = 0.5γ, while panel
(c) shows TAMR (φ = 90◦) for different values of γRSO. (d)
The setup for the measurement of the out-of-plane TAMR in
FIF MTJ, defined by Eq. (7), as a function of the magne-
tization orientation in each of the two F layers with respect
to the transport direction. The TAMR depends on the abso-
lute magnetization directions m1 and m2. In panel (e), the
Rashba SOC of strength γRSO = 0.5γ is present at both F
monolayers in contact with the tunnel barrier I. The F layers
in both semi-MTJ and MTJ have finite thickness dF = 50.

current polarization of permalloy slab matches experi-
mentally measured values, we finally tune the height of
the potential barrier Ub = 9γ in the tunnel barrier I of
thickness dI = 5 to tune the "optimistic" tunneling mag-
netoresistance (TMR) defined as

RAP − RP

,

RP

TMR =

(5)
to TMR=50 % for the FIF MTJs employed experimen-
tally.12,19 Here RAP is the resistance with antiparallel
configuration of magnetizations in the F layers of thick-
ness dF = 50, while RP is the junction resistance when
magnetizations are parallel. Since both of these resis-
tances are dominated by the tunnel barrier potential,
they are computed for clean junctions.42 To model AlOx
tunnel barrier, we use binary alloy disorder character-
ized42 by δUb = 0.5γ.

2. TAMR and spin dephasing in perpendicular transport

through interfaces with the Rashba SOC

To understand the

correspondence between the
strength of the Rashba SOC measured by the spin-
dependent hopping parameter γRSO in Eq. (3) and the

F1Im1m2(deg)(deg)0          90         180        270       360360270180900F2xz(d)151050-5-10-15TAMR (%)FImNxz(a)(e)(b)(c)0.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.81.0charge currentPoutPinor Pin=(0,0,1)Pin=(1,0,0) PoutRashba SO coupling gRSO/gPin=(0,1,0)For FIF junctions, one can define the out-of-plane

TAMR coefficient as31

TAMR (θ, φ) =

R(θ, φ) − R(θ, 0)

R(θ, 0)

,

(7)

where the meaning of angles θ and φ is explained in
Fig. 4(d). Since TAMR coefficient for FIN has only
one angle argument, there is no ambiguity in using the
same TAMR notation for both cases. The out-of-plane
TAMR for FIF MTJ is shown in Fig. 4(e).

spin transport

Unlike amply studied lateral

in
2DEGs47,48 or interfaces22 under the influence of the
Rashba SOC,48 very little is known about the effect of
such interfaces on spin transport perpendicular to the
plane, as illustrated by the measurement geometry in the
inset of Fig. 5. We clarify their effect by using Eq. (4) to
obtain the spin-polarization vector Pout of the current in
the right N lead after 100% spin-polarized charge current
with Pin = 1 is injected from the left N lead. The result
in Fig. 5 shows spin dephasing, where the outgoing spin
polarization vector Pout remains in the same direction as
Pin, but with reduced magnitude Pout < 1. The degree
of dephasing depends on the direction (perpendicular or
parallel) of the initial spin polarization with respect to
the Rashba interface.

III. NEGF APPROACH TO PUMPING BY

PRECESSING MAGNETIZATION

Theoretical studies of quantum charge pumping in
noninteracting phase-coherent systems have been con-
ducted using a variety of approaches. In the adiabatic
regime, Brouwer scattering formula37 is often used as an
elegant geometrical description of the charge pumped per
cycle in terms of the instantaneous scattering matrices
of the system. The adiabatic regime occurs when time-
dependence of the driving field parameters is slow in com-
parison to the characteristic time scales of the system,
such as the electron dwell time, so that electrons traverse
the device as if the external potential landscape if frozen
in time. Approaches beyond adiabatic regime include
Floquet scattering theory,50 iterative solutions of time-
dependent states51 and variations of the NEGF formal-
ism.40,52 Moreover, the generality of the time-dependent
NEGF framework53 makes it a usual choice in the studies
of pumping in the presence of strong Coulomb interac-
tions.54

Among these approaches, Brouwer scattering formula1
and NEGF formalism18 have been employed to describe
experiments on spin pumping by moving magnetization
in magnetic multilayers. Unlike quantum charge pump-
ing, the spin pumping in magnetic multilayers is robust
and ubiquitous effect at room temperature. Nevertheless,
the match between Brouwer scattering formula1 and ex-
periments on FN multilayers is excellent due to pumped
spin current being determined by the processes at the
FN interface. The scattering theory expresses pumped

current by a remarkably simple formula
Re g↑↓ m × dm
dt

I SP =


4π

whose dc component is given by

I Sz =

ω
4π

Re g↑↓ sin2 θ.

,

7

(8)

(9)

However, the derivation leading to this formula, as well
as the very definition of the spin-mixing conductance21
g↑↓ (where Re g↑↓ is its real part) of the FN interface,
assumes absence of any spin-flips.1

Naively, one could numerically evaluate the Brouwer
scattering formula for the whole device without intro-
ducing ill-defined g↑↓ in the presence of interfacial SOCs.
However, SOC renders all components of pumped spin
or charge current time-dependent so that one has to
compute the scattering matrix at all times within one
period τ = 2π/ω of the pumping cycle and then find
the time-averaged value of pumped currents.9,55 This is
prohibitively expensive for 3D system composed of large
number of atomic orbitals [such as the device in Fig. 1(a)
whose Hamiltonian matrix is of the size 84000 × 84000],
especially in the presence of disorder where additional
averaging over impurity configurations is required. Al-
though this could be achieved for smaller device sizes,
we find that the maximum value of pumped current os-
cillating in time is orders of magnitude larger than its
average value over one period in the case of MTJs which
prevents the estimate of experimentally relevant time-
averaged values from the numerical data.

The rotating frame approach,17,18 where pumping due
to precessing magnetization is mapped onto a dc trans-
port within a four-terminal device whose currents can
be computed18 using NEGFs, is also inapplicable in the
presence of SOCs or other spin-flip mechanisms. This
is due to the fact that the same unitary transformation
(discussed in Sec. III B) which maps time-dependent Zee-
man term in Eq. (1) to the one frozen at t = 0, generates
new time-dependent SOC terms in the rotating frame.

The time-dependent NEGF formalism53,56 makes it
possible to obtain directly the time-averaged current.
The intricacy in solving its equations stems from the fact
that nonequilibrium problems are not time-translation
invariant, so one has to work with equations for most
general case of NEGFs which depend on two time vari-
ables. There are two independent GFs that need to be
determined: (1) the retarded GF

†
ii(cid:48),ss(cid:48)(t, t(cid:48)) = −iΘ(t − t(cid:48))(cid:104){cis(t), c
i(cid:48)s(cid:48)(t(cid:48))}(cid:105),
Gr

(10)

describes the density of available quantum-mechanical
states; and (2) the lesser GF
†
ii(cid:48),ss(cid:48)(t, t(cid:48)) = i(cid:104)c
i(cid:48)s(cid:48)(t(cid:48))cis(t)(cid:105),
G<

(11)

determines how electrons occupy those quantum states.
Here (cid:104). . .(cid:105) denotes the nonequilibrium statistical aver-
age,56 and we use  = 1 to simplify notation in this

Section. Both GFs can be extracted from the contour-
ordered GF defined for any two-time values that lie on
the Keldysh contour56 (consisting of a two-way path that
begins at −∞ time, draws forward to +∞, and then

backward to −∞).

The retarded GF is governed by the following equation

of motion53

8

Gr(t, t(cid:48)) − H(t)Gr(t, t(cid:48)) −

+∞(cid:90)

dt(cid:48)(cid:48) Σr(t − t(cid:48)(cid:48))Gr(t(cid:48)(cid:48), t(cid:48)) = δ(t − t(cid:48)),

(12)

i

∂
∂t

spin degrees of freedom. In noninteracting systems, the retarded self-energy Σr(t) =(cid:80)

where we use Gr, H(t), and Σr(t) notation to emphasize that these are matrices whose indices represent space and
p(t) is simply the sum of

p Σr

−∞

dt2 Gr(t, t1)Σ<(t1, t2)Ga(t2, t(cid:48)),

self-energies Σr

p(t) due to leads p attached to the sample.

The lesser GF satisfies the Keldysh integral equation

+∞(cid:90)

dt1

−∞

G<(t, t(cid:48)) =

+∞(cid:90)
systems, the lesser self-energy Σ<(t) = (cid:80)
The Heisenberg equation for the charge Q = e(cid:80)
+∞(cid:90)

retarded ones using Σ<
attached at infinity and Γp(t) = i(Σr

p Σ<
p(t)]†).

p − [Σr

(cid:42)

(cid:43)

−∞

where the advanced GF is related to the retarded one through Gr(t, t(cid:48)) = [Ga(t(cid:48), t)]†. In the case of noninteracting
p (t) is only due to attached leads, which can be obtained from the
p = ifpΓp(t). Here fp is the Fermi function of the macroscopic reservoir to which the lead p is

iscis(cid:48) or spin density Sα = 1/2(cid:80)

†
i∈p,ss(cid:48) c

†
is[σα]ss(cid:48) cis(cid:48) opera-
i∈p,ss(cid:48) c

tors of electrons in lead p then yields expressions for time-dependent total charge current53

(13)

(14)

(15)

Ip(t) =

d Q
dt

= −2e Re

dt(cid:48)Tr [Gr(t, t(cid:48))Σ<

p (t(cid:48) − t) + G<(t, t(cid:48))Σa

p(t(cid:48) − t)],

−∞

or spin current

(cid:43)

(cid:42)

d S
dt

I Sα
p (t) =

+∞(cid:90)

dt(cid:48)Tr{σα[Gr(t, t(cid:48))Σ<

p (t(cid:48) − t) + G<(t, t(cid:48))Σa

p(t(cid:48) − t)]},

= −Re

−∞

p(t) = [Σr
in lead p. Here Σa
these expressions, limT→∞ 1
T
responding time-averaged quantities Ip and I Sα
p .

(cid:82) T /2
p(−t)]†. The integration of
−T /2(. . .), yields the cor-

In stationary problems Gr(t, t(cid:48)) and G<(t, t(cid:48)) depend
on the time-difference t−t(cid:48), which allows to Fourier trans-
form them into functions of a single energy argument and
reduce the set of coupled integral and integro-differential
equations to a set of algebraic equations. On the other
hand, when the device Hamiltonian depends on time ex-
plicitly, one has to work with both times. Since directly
solving equations Eq. (12) and (13) is cumbersome, it is
advantageous to switch to a more convenient representa-
tion. The typical choices used for problems containing
periodic time-dependent fields are: (i) the double-time

Fourier transform40,57,58

+∞(cid:90)

+∞(cid:90)

dE
2π

−∞

−∞

Gr,<(t, t(cid:48)) =

E(cid:48)
2π

e−iEt+iE(cid:48)t(cid:48)

Gr,<(E, E(cid:48));

(16)
(ii) the single Fourier transform59 in the time difference
t − t(cid:48)

Gr,<(t, t(cid:48)) =

+∞(cid:90)

−∞

dE
2π

e−iE(t−t(cid:48))Gr,<(t, E);

(17)

and (iii) the so-called Floquet matrix form Gr,<

mn(ω) de-

fined by60

Gr,<

n (E) =

(cid:90) τ /2

−τ /2

+∞(cid:90)

−∞

dtrel

1
τ

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

dtaveiEtrel+inΩtav Gr,<(t, t(cid:48)),

m + n

.

2

Ω

E +

mn(ω) = Gr,<
m−n

Gr,<
(18)
The expressions in Eq. (18), where trel = t − t(cid:48) and
tav = (t + t(cid:48))/2, exploit the periodicity condition G(t +
τ, t(cid:48) + τ ) = G(t, t(cid:48)) and are, therefore, GF counter-
part of the Floquet matrix representation for periodically
time-dependent Hamiltonian H(t + τ ) = H(t) and its
eigenstates (with the "Brillouin zone" of energies being
−Ω/2 < E ≤ Ω/2).

and

A. Exact multiphoton solution to

double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGFs

Ω =

Here we adopt the double-time Fourier transform in
Eq. (16), which has been used frequently to solve NEGF
equations for non-adiabatic charge pumping40 or spin
pumping57,58 from the 2DEG with the Rashba SOC
driven by time-periodic external fields. Due to the Flo-
quet theorem, the double-time-Fourier-transformed re-
tarded GF Gr(E, E(cid:48)) must take the form
Gr(E, E(cid:48)) = Gr(E, E + nω) = Gr

(19)

n(E).

The coupling of energies E and E + nω (n is integer)
indicates how multiphoton exchange processes contribute
toward the pumped current.

The double-time-Fourier-transformed Eq. (12) is given

by:

EGr(E, E + nω) −

+∞(cid:90)

−∞

dE(cid:48)
2π

H(E − E(cid:48))Gr(E(cid:48), E + nω)

−Σr(E)Gr(E, E + nω) = 2πδ(nω)

(20)

The Fourier transform of the Hamiltonian
H(E) = 2π[H0δ(E) + Vδ(E + ω) + V†δ(E − ω)], (21)
consists of the first term due to the time-independent
part H0 of Eq. (1), while the other two terms are Fourier-
transformed harmonic time-dependent part cast in the
form H(cid:48)(t) = Veiωt + V†e−iωt. Here V is the matrix
representation of the operator

†
∆i sin θ ([σx]ss(cid:48) − i[σy]ss(cid:48)) c
iscis(cid:48),

(22)

(cid:88)

i,ss(cid:48)

V = − 1
4

To simplify the notation, we use



H =

. . .
···
···
···
···
···
···

···
0

···
0

···
···
···
···
. . .
0
···
··· H0 V 0
··· V† H0 V ···
0 V† H0 ···
···
···
. . .
0
···
···
···

0
···

0
···

···
···
···
···
···
···
. . .



···
0

···
···
···
. . .
··· −2ω1
···
0
··· −ω1 0
···
···
···
···
···
0
···
···
0 ω1 ···
···
···
0
···
···
···

···
···
···
0
···
0
···
0
···
0 2ω1 ···
···
. . .

0
0
0
···

···

9

(24)

(25)

,


 .

Here symbol A is used to denote a matrix which acts in
the Hilbert space Hel ⊗ Hph, where the dimension of the
Hilbert space of photons Hph is infinite. The unit matrix
in the Hilbert space of a single electron Hel is 1, and the
unit matrix in Hel ⊗ Hph is denoted by 1.

Since higher order multiphoton processes yield pro-
gressively smaller contribution to the pumped current,
we restrict the dimension of Hph by considering up to
Nph photons. In this case, the dimensionality of Hph is
2Nph + 1 since one can have processes with no photon
exchange n = 0 or the maximum of n = Nph photons is
absorbed or emitted. This means that if we keep only
Nph = 1 processes, G(E) is a matrix of the dimension
lsites × 2s × 3ph where lsites is the number of lattice sites
within the central region of devices in Fig. 1, 2s takes into
account the spin degrees of freedom, and 3ph is due to
single (or no) photon exchange in the course of pumping.
The Keldysh equation (13) in this representation is

written as:

<
G

r
(E) = G

a
(E) Σ<(E + Ω) G

(E).

(26)

The knowledge of G<(E) makes it possible to obtain the
time-averaged total pumped charge current in lead p in
the absence of any dc bias voltage

dE Tr [Γp

f G

r Γ G

a − Γp G

a
r Γf G

], (27)

+∞(cid:90)

e

Ip =

2Nph

where Γ =(cid:80)

−∞

extracted from Eq. (1) as the term carrying the periodic
time-dependence.

By substituting Eq. (21) into Eq. (20) we arrive at the

following equation:

[E1 + Ω − H − Σr(E + Ω)] G

r

(E) = 1.

(23)

p

Γp and f = f (E + Ω). Since the trace in
the integrand, Tr ≡ TrelTrph, is summing over contribu-
tions from different photon exchange processes, the de-
nominator includes 2Nph to avoid double counting. Note
that the part of the trace operating in Hph space en-
sures the current conservation in our solution to NEGF

equations. The analogous formula for the pumped spin
current into lead p in the absence of any dc bias voltage
is given by

dE Tr [σα(Γp

f G

r Γ G

a − Γp G

a
r Γf G

)].(28)

+∞(cid:90)

1

I Sα
p =

4Nph

−∞

Equations (27) and (28) are the central outcome of our
formalism and can be applied to arbitrary charge or spin
pumping problem.

For the specific problem of pumping by precessing mag-
netization driven by microwaves, we take into account
that ω (cid:28) EF and simplify Eq. (27) accordingly by ex-
panding the Fermi function

f = f (EF )1 − Ω∂f /∂E.

(29)

This leads to the following adiabatic expression for
pumped charge current:

Ip =

e

2Nph

Tr{Γp(EF )[ Ω, G

r

a
(EF )Γ(EF )] G

(EF )}

(30)

assuming zero temperature. The commutator

r
[ Ω, G

r
(EF )Γ(EF )] = Ω G

(EF )Γ(EF )− G

r

(EF )Γ(EF ) Ω
(31)

allows us to make the notation more compact.

The time-averaged value of the pumped charge cur-
rent is translated into the dc pumping voltage in an open
circuit via

Vpump =

Ip

G(θ)

,

(32)

which is the quantity measured in the recent experi-
ments.12,19 Here G(θ) is the conductance of FIF or FIN
junctions computed by tilting the static magnetization of
the first F layer by an angle θ away from the z-axis and
by applying the linear-response bias voltage between the
N leads attached to the junction.

10

which emerges uniformly in the central region of devices
in Fig. 1 and their N leads, will spin-split the bands of the
N leads, thereby providing an intuitively appealing rotat-
ing frame18 picture of pumping. In this picture, the N
leads in the rotating frame are labeled by (p, σ) [p = L, R
and σ =↑,↓] and they are biased by the electrochemical
↑
↓
↑
↓
L−µ
R−µ
R = ω and µ
potential differences µ
L = ω. Thus,
these leads behave as effective half-metallic ferromagnets
which emit or absorb only one spin species. The counter-
propagating dc currents of spin-polarized electrons flow-
↓
ing from lead µ↓
p to lead µ
p(cid:48), where electrons precess in
the magnetic field of H(t = 0) frozen at an angle θ with
respect to the z-axis in order to enter into oppositely po-
larized lead, can be computed using NEGF,18 transmis-
sion matrices, or the tunneling Hamiltonian approach.17
However, the rotating frame approach cannot be ap-
plied to systems containing SOCs (or any other source
of spin flips) because unitary transformation would gen-
erate time-dependent SOC terms in Eq. (33). Never-
theless, it serves as a useful tool to compare the range
of validity of different pumping formulas because the
transport problem defined by Hamiltonian Eq. (1) with
γRSO = λESO = 0 can be solved exactly in the rotat-
ing frame. We start by first extending the NEGF-based
formulas for pumped current in the rotating frame for
devices with semi-infinite N leads treated in Ref. 18 to
those with semi-infinite F leads. This eventually makes
it possible to understand the origin of the orders of mag-
nitude discrepancy between predictions made in Ref. 16
and Ref. 18 for the dc pumping voltages in the same type
of MTJs.

Since the system in the rotating frame is stationary,
NEGFs which depend there only on the time difference
t − t(cid:48) can be Fourier transformed to work with functions
of a single energy argument

rot(E) = [E1 − Hrot − Σr
Gr
rot(E) = Gr
G<

rot(E)Σ<

rot(E)Ga

rot(E)]−1,
rot(E).

(34)
(35)

The retarded self energy in the rotating frame is obtained
from the self-energy in the lab frame through a simple
shift of its argument

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

E +

1
2

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

1
2

(cid:19)

B. Comparison with the rotating frame approach

Σr

rot,p(E) = Σr
p

ωσz

.

(36)

In the absence of interactions causing spin-flips, such as
the SOC, it is possible to convert the complicated time-
dependent transport problem posed by the presence of
precessing magnetization in the devices in Fig. 1 into the
time-independent one by performing the unitary17,18,61,62
transformation of the Hamiltonian Eq. (1)

Hrot = U H(t) U† − i U

∂
∂t

U† ≡ H(t = 0) − ω
2

σz.

(33)

Here the unitary operator is given by U = eiωσzt/2
for m(t) precessing counterclockwise. The transformed
Hamiltonian Hrot is time-independent in the frame ro-
tating with the magnetization. The Zeeman term ωσz/2,

(cid:18)
rot(E) = i(cid:80)

E +

1
2

The lesser self-energy in the rotating frame is then given
by

Σ<

rot,p(E) = if

ωσz

Γp

E +

ωσz

.

(37)

p Gr

rot(E) = Gr(E + ωσz/2) for the retarded
This leads to Gr
GF and G<
rot for the
lesser one, where f = f (E + ωσz/2) is the Fermi function
in the rotating frame written as a 2 × 2 matrix in the
spin space. Using Gr
rot(E) and the following
identity

rotfΓp(E + ωσz/2)Ga

rot(E), G<

(cid:18)

(cid:19)

iGr

rotΓ

E +

1
2

ωσz

Ga

rot = Gr

rot − Ga
rot,

(38)

I RF
p = e

+∞(cid:90)
where Γ = (cid:80)

−∞
−ΓpGr

dE

f↓ − f↑

2

Tr [Γp σzGr

rot(E)ΓGa

rot(E)

rot(E)ΓσzGa

rot(E)],

(39)

p Γp. Here f↑ = f (E + ω/2) and f↓ =

f (E − ω/2) are the diagonal elements of f (E).
Thus, according to Eq. (39) only electrons whose en-
ergies fall into the interval [EF − ω, EF + ω] participate
in pumping (at zero temperature). Because of this, our
more general solution Eq. (27), truncated Nph = 1 to
take into account only zero or single microwave photon
exchange processes, gives identical result to Eq. (39) in
the rotating frame approach assuming absence of spin-
flip processes.
Similarly to Sec. III A, we can take into account that
ω (cid:28) EF for microwave frequencies which yields pumped
current in the adiabatic limit (where current is propor-
tional to ω):

I RF
p =

eω
2

Tr{Γp[σz, GrΓ]Ga}.

(40)

Here all matrices are computed at EF in the laboratory
frame after we neglect their frequency dependence in the
rotating frame by invoking the adiabatic condition ω →
0.

C. Comparison with adiabatic scattering theory

In the adiabatic limit, one can also employ the Brouwer
scattering formula37 which gives the following expression
for pumped charge current in terms of the derivatives of
the instantaneous scattering matrix of the device:

τ(cid:90)

(cid:40)(cid:88)

leads to an expression for pumped charge current in lead
p

I ST
p = eω

dt Tr

0

q

Spq(EF , t)i

∂
∂t

S†
pq(EF , t)

.

(41)
We can recast Eq. (41) in terms of NEGFs for stationary
transport (which depend on only one energy argument)
by using the Fisher-Lee formula63 for the scattering ma-
trix

√
Spq(EF , t) = −1δpq + i

Γp · Gr

pq(EF , t) ·

(42)
pq is the submatrix of Gr = [E − H(t) − Σr]−1
Here Gr
which connects edge monolayer of the device attached to
lead p to the edge monolayer attached to lead q. The
pumped current is then expressed as40,52

Γq.

√

I ST
p = eω

dt Tr

ΓpGr(EF , t)i

∂
∂t

[ΓGa(EF , t)]

.(43)

(cid:26)

τ(cid:90)

0

(cid:41)

(cid:27)

11

FIG. 6: (Color online) The comparison of the dc pumping
voltage in a clean NFIFN junction with finite thickness F
layers (dF = 50) and a clean FIF junction whose F layers are
semi-infinite.16 The two curves can be computed using either
the adiabatic NEGF formula in the rotating frame Eq. (40)
or the adiabatic scattering formula Eq. (43). The parameters
of these junction are chosen as EF = −2γ, ∆ = 2γ, and
Ub = 9γ.

This expression is equivalent to Eq. (40) due to the fact
that frequency dependence of all NEGF quantities in the
latter has been neglected.

Nevertheless, the application of Eq. (41) to clean MTJs
with no spin-flip processes, where the scattering matrix
was obtained directly by matching the wave functions
across a simple model of FeMgOFe junction, has pre-
dicted16 three orders of magnitude smaller pumping volt-
age than the rotating frame formula Eq. (40) applied to
the same junction.17,18 Figure 6 explains that the ori-
gin of this discrepancy is not the particular formalism
employed, but the assumed MTJ setup which contains
semi-infinite F leads in Ref. 16 and finite thickness F lay-
ers in Ref. 17,18. Although the exact ratio of the voltage
signals in these two models depends on the chosen values
of EF and ∆ at fixed Ub, the voltage signal in FIF MTJ
model always remains below the one in the NFIFN
model.

Both of these models describe unrealistic MTJs -- there
is no any kind of spin accumulation in the F layers in
the FIF model, where semi-infinite F leads simply serve
to define the spin-dependent scattering states, or spin
accumulation persists throughout the finite thickness F
layer in the NFIFN model. At the same time, the
prediction of Ref. 16 is far below experimental values12
(∼ 1 nV predicted versus ∼ 1 µV measured at (cid:39) 2 GHz
FMR frequency), which points out to the need to take
into account additional ingredients20 in the MTJ model.

03060901201501800.00.10.20.30.4FIF DC Voltage Vpump (w/e)Precession Cone Angle q (deg)NFIFNx10-30.00.40.81.2 12

The knowledge of ¯Gr

n allows one to express the pumped

charge current in lead p as40,58

+∞(cid:90)

+∞(cid:88)

1
2π
×Γ(E + nω) ¯Ga

n=−∞

−∞

I CF
p =

dE Tr{Γp(E) ¯Gr

n(E)

n(E)}[f (E + nω) − f (E)].(45)
The summation over n in this formula shows how multi-
photon exchange processes assist current pumping. This
expression can be used for non-adiabatic external poten-
tials,40 while in the adiabatic regime ω → 0 and at zero
temperature the difference of Fermi functions is replaced
by f (E + nω) − f (E) ≈ ωδ(E − EF ), so that only the
Fermi level states carry the pumped current.

n−1 required to obtain Gr

Although one can in principle solve continued fractions
for αn and βn to arbitrary order n, this is virtually im-
possible to execute for sizable 3D devices (such as the
ones in Fig. 1) due to the need to compute numerous sub-
matrices of Gr
n. Instead, most
of recent applications57,58 of the continued fractions so-
lution to spin pumping in 2DEGs with the Rashba SOC
have utilized only a few fractions (n ≤ 3).
In other
words, the convergence of the sum over n in Eq. (45) can
be achieved quickly only for small amplitude of the exter-
nal potential V → 0 which ensures that higher order
fractions are negligible. The lowest order n = 0,±1 ver-
sion of Eq. (45) simplifies to58

+∞(cid:90)
+∞(cid:90)

−∞

I CF
p =

dE Tr{Γp(E)gr(E)V†A1(E)Vga(E)}

1
2π
×[f (E + ω) − f (E)]

−∞

+

1
2π

dE Tr{Γp(E)gr(E)VA−1(E)V†ga(E)}

×[f (E − ω) − f (E)],

(46)

where An(E) = gr

n(E)Γ(E + nω)ga

n(E).

Figure 7 shows that Eq. (46) is insufficient to ana-
lyze pumping by magnetization dynamics in MTJs since
it fails to reproduce the exact solution for dc pumping
voltage in junctions with no spin flips given by Eq. (39)
in the rotating frame approach. Because the strength
of the pumping potential in Eq. (22) is determined by
∆ sin θ, pumping voltage computed from Eq. (46) can
be valid only at small angles cone angles (θ (cid:46) 10◦ in
Fig. 7; this interval would be somewhat larger in FN
multilayers). Even at small cone angles, the prediction
p ∝ ∆2 sin2 θ stemming from Eq. (46), which is in
I CF
accord with the "standard model" Eq. (9), becomes in-
correct in the presence of SOC where Ip vs. θ turns out
to be quite different (see Sec. IV). We note that one could
try to use more general Eq. (45), but this would require
to compute continued fractions αn and βn to high order
n, unlike our non-perturbative solution Eq. (27) which

FIG. 7: (Color online) The dc pumping voltage in a clean
FIF MTJ with finite thickness F layers (dF = 50) in the
absence of any SOCs computed using: (i) the exact solution
Eq. (40) obtained via the rotating frame approach or, equiva-
lently, full time-dependent solution Eq. (30) with one photon
processes taken into account Nph = 1; and (ii) truncated (to
n = ±1) continued fractions solution to double-time-Fourier-
transformed NEGF equations which gives pumped charge cur-
rent via Eq. (46). The shaded area marks the interval of
precession cone angles θ (cid:46) 10◦ beyond which the continued
fractions solution is not applicable anymore.

D. Comparison with continued fractions solution to

double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGF equations

The double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGF equa-
tions in Sec. III A have been solved before for spin and
charge pumping problems in an iterative manner using
continued fractions.40,57,58 Therefore, in this Section we
discuss the advantage of our solution from Sec. III A over
continued fractions technique using the same FIF clean
MTJs model (with F layers of finite thickness and no
SOCs) from Fig. 6 as a test bed.

In the continued fractions method, one starts from the

equation of motion for Gr

n(E) written as

Gr

n(E) = 2πδ(nω)gr

n+1(E)Vgr

n(E)

n(E) + Gr
n(E),

n−1(E)V†gr

+Gr

(44)
Here gr(E) = [E − H0 − Σr(E)]−1 is the Fourier trans-
form of the retarded GF gr(t − t(cid:48)) in the absence of
the pumping potential H(cid:48)(t) = 0 which, therefore, de-
pends only on the time difference t − t(cid:48) and can be
Fourier transformed to a single energy argument. We
n = 2πδ(0) ¯Gr
also use notation gr
1α1V + Vgr−1β−1V†. This equation is
and Σr
then solved40,57,58 in an iterative manner using ¯Gr
0 =
[(gr
nαn for
n ≥ 1, and ¯Gr
nβn for n ≤ −1. The co-
n = ¯Gr
efficients αn and βn are generated through continued
fractions, αn(1 − V†gr
n) = 1 and βn(1 −
Vgr
n) = 1.

0]−1 for n = 0, ¯Gr

n(E) = gr(E + nω), Gr

n−1βn−1V†gr

0)−1 − Σr

0 = V†gr

n+1αn+1Vgr

n−1V†gr

n = ¯Gr

n+1Vgr

n

0306090120150180-0.08-0.06-0.04-0.020.000.02NFIFN(ii) DC Voltage Vpump (w/e)Precession Cone Angle q (deg)(i)reproduces the exact result in the rotating frame using
only n = 0,±1 in the multiphoton GF in Eq. (19).

IV. THE EFFECT OF INTERFACIAL RASHBA

SOC ON THE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OF SPIN
PUMPING IN FIN AND FIF JUNCTIONS

Equation (30) applied to clean FIN junctions with in-
terfacial Rashba SOC allows us to understand how the
dc pumping voltage can appear in such semi-MTJs at
the adiabatic level. The Rashba SOC is present at the
FI interface (i.e., at the last monolayer of the precessing
F layer that is in contact with the tunnel barrier I) and
intrinsically participates in the pumping process. This
is in contrast to other recent theories24 of spin pump-
ing in FN multilayers where SOC is located away from
the precessing F layer and, therefore, is not essential to
understand the pumping effect itself.
Figure 8(a) demonstrates that dc pumping voltage
Vpump ∝ ω in FIN junctions emerges as soon as
the Rashba SOC is "turned on". This could explain
signal observed experimentally19 in FIN junctions, in
contrast to previous attempts17,18 which have predicted
Vpump ∝ (ω)2. For comparison, Fig. 8(b) shows how the
presence of strong Rashba SOC directly at the FI inter-
face also enhances Vpump in conventional FIF MTJs.

Figure 8(d) provides additional insight into the charge
pumping mechanism where we show that the dc pump-
ing voltage in FIN semi-MTJs requires to include ex-
change of up to ten microwave photons in order to reach
its asymptotic value. However, since that asymptotic
value of Vpump is only about 10% higher than the result
plotted in Figs. 8(a) and 8(c), where only zero or single
microwave photon exchange processes are taken into ac-
count, we employ only this lowest order approximation
in the rest of the paper since [Nph = 1 in Eq. (30) is
computationally much less expensive than Nph = 10].
The unique experimentally testable signature of charge
pumping in FIN semi-MTJs that we predict in Fig. 8(c)
is angular dependence of Vpump(θ) which changes sign
and it is,
therefore, quite different from the usual
Vpump(θ) for FIF MTJs shown in Fig. 6. The charge
pumping in semi-MTJs with weak interfacial Rashba
SOC can be obtained analytically using the second-order
perturbation expansion of GF entering Eq. (41) as the
version of the Brouwer scattering formula:

(cid:21)

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

(cid:90) τ
(cid:20)

0

IL = eωDL

= eωDL

dt ez · m(t)

m(t) × ∂m(t)

(47)

∂t

cos2 χ − 1
2

sin2 χ

sin2 θ cos θ.

Here χ is the angle between the axis around which the
magnetization precesses and the direction of transport
[in the case of our device in Fig. 1(b), cos2 χ− 1
2 sin2 χ =
−1/2]. The lengthy explicit expression for DL ∝ γ2
RSO
determining the magnitude of the pumped current is pro-

13

FIG. 8: (Color online) The dc pumping voltage in clean FIN
semi-MTJ [panels (a),(c) and (d) and FIF MTJ [panel (b)]
with finite thickness (dF = 50) F layers and non-zero interfa-
cial Rashba SOC. The Rashba SOC is located within the last
monolayer of the precessing F layer that is in contact with the
tunnel barrier I in (a),(c),(d) [as illustrated in Fig. 1(a)], or
such edge monolayers are present in the left or both F layers
[as illustrated in Fig. 1(b)] in panel (b). The data in pan-
els (a),(b),(c) is computed by considering only one microwave
photon exchange processes, while in panel (d) we show correc-
tion to this result when up to 9 microwave photons are taken
into account in Eq. (30) applied to FIN semi-MTJ.

vided in Appendix A. In Fig. 8(c), we assume strong in-
terfacial Rashba SOC (γRSO = 0.5γ) so that Vpump(θ) vs.
θ plotted there deviates from this analytical expression
Vpump(θ) ∝ sin2 θ cos θ/G(θ). Note that for small TAMR
[γRSO (cid:46) 0.4 according to Fig. 4(c)] G(θ) can be con-
sidered nearly constant, so that Vpump(θ) ∝ sin2 θ cos θ
according to Eq. (47).

The second-order nature of this process can be illus-
trated using real space Feynman paths where electron im-
pinging onto the tunnel barrier is reflected with rotation
of its spin introduced by the Rashba interface. There-
fore, it has to travel twice through this monolayer to
reach the right N lead. This picture is encoded quantita-
tively in the expression for DL in Eq. (A2) which contains
∝ γ2
RSO and
angular dependence has also been predicted34 for linear-
response STT in FIN semi-MTJs with the interfacial
Rashba SOC, which is in accord with reciprocal nature
of STT and spin pumping. That is, observation of one of
these two effects implies, by Onsager reciprocal relations,
the existence of the other effect.9

RSO dependence. We note that the same ∝ γ2

0306090120150180-10-505100.00.20.40.60.00.20.40.60.81.00.00.20.40.60.00.20.40.60.802468100246810  FIF gRSO=0.5g q=10 q=10 q=10 gRSO=0.5g FIN FIN FIN single Rashba SOC interface two Rashba SOC interfaces   Rashba SOC gRSO/gx10-2x10-2x10-2 (a) Rashba SOC gRSO/gVpump(w/e) Vpump(w/e)(d)(c)(b)(VNphpump-VNph=1pump)/VNph=1pump (%)Vpump(w/e) Number of PhotonsPrecession Cone Angle q (deg)V. DISORDER AND EXTRINSIC SOC
EFFECTS ON CHARGE PUMPING IN

MAGNETIC TUNNEL JUNCTIONS

In this Section, we analyze how disorder and the cor-
responding extrinsic SOC affects dc pumping voltage in
conventional FIF MTJs. To isolate their effects only,
we assume that interfacial intrinsic Rashba SOC studied
in Sec. IV is absent. When extrinsic SOC is negligible,
we find that dc pumping voltage plotted in Fig. 9(a) is
increasing in the quasiballistic transport regime (char-
acterized by the Fano factor F < 1/3 in Fig. 2) and
then decreases once the diffusive regime (characterized
by the Fano factor F = 1/3 in Fig. 2) is reached. At first
site, this initial increase of Vpump with increasing dis-
order is counterintuitive, even though conductance also
decreases with disorder, since pumped current appears
to be increasing with W . However, it can be explained
qualitatively as being due to random electron scattering
in real space which prolongs the average time an electron
remains in the left F layer where it can interact with pho-
tons of the microwave pumping field. Similar enhance-
ment of pure spin current pumping has been noticed in
the diffusive regime in related device setups.58,61

The same disorder used in Fig. 9(a) is related to the
extrinsic SOC through Eq. (2), which becomes a rele-
vant effect if λESO is renormalized by the band structure
effects to become stronger than its vacuum value by sev-
eral orders of magnitude.25 Unlike the interfacial Rashba
SOC studied in Sec. IV which brings novel effects into the
pumping mechanism, the extrinsic SOC simply reduces
the dc pumping voltage in FIF junctions, as shown in
Fig. 9(b). Our unified quantum transport treatment of
spin pumping [Fig. 9(b)] and spin diffusion (Fig. 3) shows
that voltage signal of spin pumping in MTJs is brought to
negligible value when the ratio of the F layer thickness to
Lsf is dF /Lsf (cid:39) 5. We emphasize that our fully quantum-
mechanical treatment of the conduction electrons is nec-
essary to understand such interplay of spin pumping,
spin accumulation around interfaces20 and spin diffu-
sion in MTJs since conventional approach1 developed
for FN multilayers, where pumping is treated quantum-
mechanically while subsequent propagation of spins and
charges is described semiclassically using phenomenolog-
ical mean free path and spin-diffusion length, is inappli-
cable to systems containing tunnel barriers where spin
accumulation is not well-defined.7

VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have derived an exact and efficient for computa-
tional implementations solution to the equations of mo-
tion for the double-time-Fourier-transformed NEGFs in
the presence of time-periodic external potential. Unlike
continued fractions solution40 for the same equations,
which is often applied to problems of spin58 and charge
pumping40 by computing only a finite number of con-

14

FIG. 9: The dc pumping voltage in FIF MTJs of finite thick-
ness F layers (dF = 50) with: (a) static disorder of strength
W within F layers; (b) static disorder of strength W = 3γ
ensuring diffusive transport regime (see Fig. 2) and the ex-
trinsic SOC of strength λESO determined by such disorder
via Eq. (2). The tunnel barrier I in both panels contains
binary alloy disorder δUb = 0.5γ. The spin-diffusion length
corresponding to the values of λESO is shown in the inset of
Fig. 3.

tinued fractions while assuming that the amplitude of
time-periodic external potential is small, our formulas for
pumped charge Eq. (27) and spin Eq. (28) currents in the
leads of a multiterminal devices can be used for arbitrary
strength of periodic driving potential (thereby covering
both perturbative57,58 and non-perturbative regimes) or
frequency (thereby covering both adiabatic and non-
adiabatic pumping regimes).

This fully quantum-mechanical treatment of pumping
processes and subsequent propagation of electrons is ap-
plied to the problem of charge pumping by precessing
magnetization in the single F layer of FIN semi-MTJ
or FIF conventional MTJ in the presence of intrin-
sic Rashba SOC at the FI interface. The non-zero in-
terfacial Rashba SOC, located30 within the edge mono-
layer of the precessing F in contact with the tunnel bar-
rier I, generates non-zero dc pumping voltage in FIN
semi-MTJ at the adiabatic level (i.e., pumping voltage
is proportional to the microwave frequency ω). This
could explain observations of voltage signal with such
properties in the recent experiments19 on microwave-
driven FIN semi-MTJs where previously formulated
theories17,18 have found only a very small non-adiabatic

0.00.51.01.52.02.53.0-101230.000.020.040.060.080.00.51.01.5q=10(cid:176)lESO=0 Disorder Strength W/gFIFx10-3x10-3(b)  (a)FIFq=10(cid:176)W=3g  DC Voltage Vpump (w/e)Extrinsic SO Coupling lESO/g(∝ ω2) voltage signal. We further predict a unique signa-
ture of this charge pumping phenomenon -- the pumped
charge current changes sign (I ∝ sin2 θ cos θ for small
γRSO) as the function of the precession cone angle θ so
that measuring the corresponding dc pumping voltage
(Vpump ∝ sin2 θ cos θ for small γRSO) would confirm our
prediction.

Besides offering quantitative description of charge and
spin pumping processes, our solution for NEGFs whose
two energy arguments are connected by the Floquet the-
orem describing multiphoton emission and absorption
processes also provides new physical insights: (i) in the
absence of SOCs, emission or absorption of one photon
is sufficient to match the exact solution in the rotating
frame;18,61 (ii) in the presence of Rashba SOC, exchange
of up to ten photons is required to reach asymptotic value
of the pumped currents. Nevertheless, this asymptotic
value is only about 10% larger than the value obtained
using just one photon processes in the presence of SOCs.
We also find that static disorder can increase the dc
pumping voltage in FIF MTJs with finite thickness F
layers in the quasiballistic transport regime where scat-
tered electrons spend more time within the precessing F
layer to interact with microwave photons. The extrinsic
SOC determined by the impurity potential responsible
for the diffusive transport regime causes spin relaxation
which ultimately diminishes the pumping voltage in FIF
MTJs to zero when the spin-diffusion length is about five
times shorter than the thickness of the F layers.

Acknowledgments

15

Grant No. DE-FG02-07ER46374. J. F. was supported
by Grant DFG SFB 689. N. N. was supported by Grant-
in-Aids for Scientific Research (21244053) from the Min-
istry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technol-
ogy of Japan, Strategic International Cooperative Pro-
gram (Joint Research Type) from Japan Science and
Technology Agency, and also by Funding Program for
World-Leading Innovative R&D on Science and Technol-
ogy (FIRST Program).

Appendix A: Expression for pumped charge current

in FIN junctions with interfacial Rashba SOC

Here we provide explicit expression for the coefficient
DL which determines the strength of pumped charge cur-
rent in Eq. (47) for FIN semi-MTJ with weak interfacial
Rashba SOC, as discussed in Sec. IV. In the absence of
Rashba SOC, the retarded GF of FIN semi-MTJ can be
written as

0 = g0 + g1m · σ.
Gr

(A1)
Starting from this expression, the second-order perturba-
tion theory in the powers of γRSO applied to GF in the
Brouwer scattering formula, recast as Eq. (41), yields

DL = 4

†
Re{Tr [Γpg0Vαg1Vαg1Γg
1

(cid:88)
†
†
−Γpg1Vαg1Vαg0Γg
1 − Γpg1Vαg1Γg
0Vαg
†
†
−Γαg1Vαg1Γg
0]},
1Vαg

α

†
1
(A2)

We thank G. E. W. Bauer, S.-H. Chen, T. Moriyama,
M. Wimmer and J. Q. Xiao for illuminating discus-
sions. F. M. and B. K. N. were supported by DOE

Here the vector V = (Vx, Vy, Vz), which contains the
strength of the Rashba SOC γRSO,
is defined by
HRSO = ex · (V × σ) where HRSO is the Rashba Hamil-
tonian [i.e., the fourth term in Eq. (1)].

∗ Electronic address: bnikolic@udel.edu
1 Y. Tserkovnyak, A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, and B. I.

Halperin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1375 (2005).

2 N. Nagaosa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77, 031010 (2008).
3 M. Switkes, C. M. Marcus, K. Campman, and A. C. Gos-

sard, Science 283, 1905 (1999).

4 S. K. Watson, R. M. Potok, C. M. Marcus, and V. Uman-

sky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 258301 (2003).

5 B. Heinrich and G. Woltersdorf, J. Supercond. Novel Mag-

netism 20, 83 (2007).

6 T. Gerrits, M. L. Schneider, and T. J. Silva, J. Appl. Phys.

99, 023901 (2006).

7 T. Taniguchi and H. Imamura, Phys. Rev. B 78, 224421

(2008).

8 W. Chen, M. J. Rooks, N. Ruiz, J. Z. Sun, and A. D. Kent,

Phys. Rev. B 74, 144408 (2006).

9 K. M. D. Hals, A. Brataas, and Y. Tserkovnyak, EPL (Eu-

11 E. Saitoh, M. Ueda, H. Miyajima, and G. Tatara, Appl.

Phys. Lett. 88, 182509 (2006).

12 R. Cao, T. Moriyama, W. G. Wang, X. Fan, J. Kolodzey,
S.-H. Chen, C.-R. Chang, Y. Tserkovnyak, B. K. Nikoli´c,
and J. Q. Xiao, IEEE Trans. Magn. 45, 3434 (2009).

13 M. V. Costache, M. Sladkov, S. M. Watts, C. H. van der
Wal, and B. J. van Wees, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 216603
(2006); M. V. Costache, S. M. Watts, C. H. van der Wal,
and B. J. van Wees, Phys. Rev. B 78, 064423 (2008).

14 Y. Kajiwara, K. Harii, S. Takahashi, J. Ohe, K. Uchida,
M. Mizuguchi, H. Umezawa, H. Kawai, K. Ando, K.
Takanashi, S. Maekawa, and E. Saitoh, Nature 464, 262
(2010).

15 H. Kurebayashi, O. Dzyapko, V. E. Demidov, D. Fang, A.
J. Ferguson, and S. O. Demokritov, Nature Mater. 10, 660
(2011).

16 J. Xiao, G. E. W. Bauer, and A. Brataas, Phys. Rev. B

rophysics Letters) 90, 47002 (2010).

77, 180407 (2008).

10 D. Ralph and M. Stiles, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 320, 1190

17 Y. Tserkovnyak, T. Moriyama, and J. Q. Xiao, Phys. Rev.

(2008).

B 78, 020401 (2008).

18 S.-H. Chen, C.-R. Chang, J. Q. Xiao, and B. K. Nikoli´c,

(2003).

16

Phys. Rev. B 79, 054424 (2009).

19 T. Moriyama, R. Cao, X. Fan, G. Xuan, B. K. Nikoli´c,
Y. Tserkovnyak, J. Kolodzey, and J. Q. Xiao, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 100, 067602 (2008).

20 S. T. Chui and Z. F. Lin, Phys. Rev. B 77, 094432 (2008).
21 A. Brataas, G. E. W. Bauer, and P. J. Kelly, Phys. Rep.

427, 157 (2006).

22 I. M. Miron, G. Gaudin, S. Auffret, B. Rodmacq, A.
Schuhl, S. Pizzini, J. Vogel, and P. Gambardella, Nature
Mater. 9, 230 (2010).

23 Y.-H. Zhu, B. Hillebrands, and H. C. Schneider, Phys. Rev.

B 79, 214412 (2009).

24 A. Takeuchi, K. Hosono, and G. Tatara, Phys. Rev. B 81,

144405 (2010).

41 K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. B 72,

033401 (2005).

42 H. Itoh, J. Inoue, A. Umerski, and J. Mathon, Phys. Rev.

B 68, 174421 (2003).

43 B. K. Nikoli´c and L. P. Zarbo, EPL (Europhysics Letters)

77, 47004 (2007).

44 R. Winkler,

in Two-
Dimensional Electron and Hole Systems (Springer, Berlin,
2003).

Spin-Orbit Coupling Effects

45 H. Bentmann, F. Forster, G. Bihlmayer, E. V. Chulkov, L.
Moreschin, M. Grioni, and F. Reinert, EPL (Europhysics
Letters) 87, 37003 (2009).

46 Y. M. Blanter and M. Buttiker, Phys. Rep. 336, 1 (2000).
47 B. K. Nikoli´c and R. L. Dragomirova, Semicond. Sci. Tech.

25 N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. MacDonald, and N.

24, 064006 (2009).

P. Ong, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1539 (2010).

26 C. Gould, C. Ruster, T. Jungwirth, E. Girgis, G. M.
Schott, R. Giraud, K. Brunner, G. Schmidt, and L. W.
Molenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 117203 (2004).

27 J. Moser, A. Matos-Abiague, D. Schuh, W. Wegscheider, J.
Fabian, and D. Weiss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 056601 (2007).
28 M. Wimmer, M. Lobenhofer, J. Moser, A. Matos-Abiague,
D. Schuh, W. Wegscheider, J. Fabian, K. Richter, and D.
Weiss, Phys. Rev. B 80, 121301 (2009).

29 A. N. Chantis, K. D. Belashchenko, E. Y. Tsymbal, and
M. van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 046601 (2007).
30 M. Gmitra, A. Matos-Abiague, C. Ambrosch-Draxl, and J.

Fabian, preprint arXiv:0907.4149.

48 B. K. Nikoli´c and S. Souma, Phys. Rev. B 71, 195328

(2005).

49 M. Zhu, C. L. Dennis, and R. D. McMichael, Phys. Rev.

B 81, 140407 (2010).

50 M. Moskalets and M. Buttiker, Phys. Rev. B 66, 205320

(2002).

51 O. Entin-Wohlman, A. Aharony, and Y. Levinson, Phys.

Rev. B 65, 195411 (2002).

52 L. Arrachea and M. Moskalets, Phys. Rev. B 74, 245322

(2006).

53 A.-P. Jauho, N. S. Wingreen, and Y. Meir, Phys. Rev. B

50, 5528 (1994).

54 D. Fioretto and A. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 236803

31 A. Matos-Abiague and J. Fabian, Phys. Rev. B 79, 155303

(2008).

(2009).

32 K. Obata and G. Tatara, Phys. Rev. B 77, 214429 (2008).
33 P. M. Haney and M. D. Stiles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105,

126602 (2010).

34 A. Manchon, Phys. Rev. B 83, 172403 (2011).
35 A. Manchon and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 78, 212405
(2008); A. Manchon and S. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 79,
094422 (2009).

36 P. Gambardella and I. M. Miron, Philos. Transact. A Math.

55 J. Ohe, A. Takeuchi, G. Tatara, and B. Kramer, Physica

E 40, 1554 (2008).

56 H. Haug and A.-P. Jauho, Quantum kinetics in transport

and optics of semiconductors (Springer, Berlin, 2007).

57 C. Li, Y. Yu, Y. Wei, and J. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 75,

035312 (2007).

58 K. Hattori, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 77, 034707 (2008).
59 L. Arrachea, Phys. Rev. B 75, 035319 (2007).
60 N. Tsuji, T. Oka, and H. Aoki, Phys. Rev. B 78, 235124

Phys. Eng. Sci. 369, 3175 (2011).

(2008).

37 P. W. Brouwer, Phys. Rev. B 58, R10135 (1998).
38 R. H. Silsbee, A. Janossy, and P. Monod, Phys. Rev. B 19,

61 K. Hattori, Phys. Rev. B 75, 205302 (2007).
62 P. Zhang, Q.-K. Xue, and X. C. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91,

4382 (1979).

39 A. Takeuchi and G. Tatara, arXiv:1104.4215.
40 B. Wang, J. Wang, and H. Guo, Phys. Rev. B 68, 155326

196602 (2003).

63 D. S. Fisher and P. A. Lee, Phys. Rev. B 23, 6851 (1981).

