Arrays of Nano-Electromechanical Biosensors 

Functionalized by Microcontact Printing 

Sven Salomon,1,2 Thierry Leïchlé,* 1,2 Denis Dezest, 1,2 Florent Seichepine, 1,2 Samuel Guillon, 1,2 

Christophe Thibault, 1,2 Christophe Vieu, 1,2 and Liviu Nicu1,2 

1CNRS, LAAS, 7 avenue du colonel Roche, F-31400 Toulouse, France 

2Univ de Toulouse, LAAS, F-31400 Toulouse, France 

tleichle@laas.fr 

RECEIVED DATE 

*E-mail: tleichle@laas.fr 

ABSTRACT 

The  biofunctionalization  of  nanoelectromechanical  structures  is  critical  for  the  development  of  new 

classes  of  biosensors  displaying  improved  performances  and  higher-level  of  integration. We  propose  a 

modified  microcontact  printing  method  for  the  functionalization  and  passivation  of  large  arrays  of 

nanocantilevers  in  a  single,  self-aligned  step.  Using  fluorescence  microscopy  and  resonant  frequency 

measurements, we demonstrate  (1)  the  bioactivity  and  the  anti-fouling property  of deposited  antibodies 

and BSA molecules and (2) the preservation of the nanostructures’ mechanical integrity. 

KEYWORDS 

Nanoelectromechanical systems, Biosensing, Biofunctionalization, Microcontact Printing, Cantilever 

 

1 

MANUSCRIPT TEXT 

High-frequency  nanoelectromechanical  systems  (NEMS)  are  attracting  more  and  more  interest  as  a 

new  class  of  sensors  and  actuators  for  potential  applications  ranging  from  computation1  to  single 

(bio)molecule  sensing.2,  3  For NEMS  to  be  considered  as  a  viable  alternative  to  their  actual  biosensing 

macro counterparts,  they have  to simultaneously meet  three major requirements: high mass responsivity 

(MR), low minimum detectable mass (MDM) and low response time (RT). 

Without  any  doubt,  as  emphasized  by  theoretical  studies,4  the  two  first  specifications  (high  MR  and 

low  MDM)  can  be  successfully  addressed  by  NEMS  devices.  Such  predictions  have  been  already 

validated  in  case  of  virus  sensing,5  enumeration  of  DNA  molecules6  or  even  single  molecule 

nanomechanical  mass  spectrometry.2  Hopelessly,  nanometer  scale  sensors  have  been  proved,  still  in 

theory,7,  8  to  be  inadequate  to  practical  RT  scales which,  if  confirmed  as  such,  could  definitely  impede 

the  way  towards  realistic  biosensing  applications.  To  prevent  this  from  happening,  one  possible  trade-

off  strategy would consist  in  taking advantage from considering a single NEMS device not alone but as 

part  of  a  functional  array  of  similar  devices.9  This  paradigm  allows,  while  preserving  the  benefits  of 

high  MR  and  low  MDM  of  a  single  device,  to  use  the  considerably  higher  capture  area  of  the  NEMS 

array  such  as  the  RT  reaches  practical  relevance.  However,  in  that  case,  the  non-reactive  areas  of  the 

chip containing multiple sensors functionalized with a single type of probe molecule must be adequately 

coated  with  an  anti-fouling  film  in  order  to  lower  the  probability  of  adsorption  of  target  molecules 

anywhere else than on sensitive areas and hence to permit their detection at ultra-low concentrations. 

To  address  the  production  of massively  parallel  arrays  of NEMS  for  biorecognition  applications,  one 

has to be able to perform uniform, reliable biofunctionalization of nanoscale devices at a large-scale (i.e. 

at the level of the entire NEMS array) while being able to block all other surfaces. Ideally, this could be 

achieved by using a  technique enabling  the deposition of  the probe molecules and  the anti-fouling  layer 

in  a  single  self-aligned  printing  step,  thus  ensuring  that  target molecules  only  react  with  the  surface  of 

the sensor. 

 

2 

Here we use an advanced microcontact printing (µCP) process10  in order  to biofunctionalize arrays of 

NEMS with  a  probe molecule on  the  active  sensing  area  either prior  to or  together with  an  anti-fouling 

layer  on  the  passive  areas.  We  demonstrate  the  adequate  functionalization/anti-fouling  of  arrays  of 

freestanding nanocantilevers as dense as 105 nanostructures/cm² by using both fluorescence microscopy 

and dynamic measurements of  the structures’ resonant frequency. The proper bioactivity of an antibody 

deposited  onto  the  cantilevers,  and  the  blocking  property  of  a  bovine  serum  albumin  (BSA)  layer  are 

both  assessed  by  incubating  specific  and  non-specific  tagged  secondary  antibodies  followed  by 

fluorescence  imaging.  Furthermore,  measurement  of  the  resonant  frequency  of  the  nanocantilevers 

before  and  after  functionalization  and  biological  recognition  demonstrate  that  using  µCP  for  device 

functionalization does not damage the nanostructures and preserves the mechanical sensing capability of 

our NEMS. 

One  of  the major  issues  preventing  the  breakthrough  of NEMS  devices  for  biodetection  applications 

remains  the  bio-functionalization  of  the  sensor,  i.e.  the  grafting  of  probe  molecules  onto  its  active 

surface.11 While  this  technical difficulty  can  easily be circumvented when  taking a bottom-up  approach 

since  the  nanostructures  can  be  functionalized  before  integrating  them  into  a  device,  it  raises 

tremendous  constraints  when  considering  NEMS  devices  obtained  by  means  of  micro-  and 

nanofabrication techniques. Indeed, preservation of the bioactivity of the sensing layer imposes to avoid 

subsequent  fabrication  steps  leading  to  the  degradation  or  the  alteration  of  the  probe  molecules,  e.g. 

processes  involving  plasma  and  vacuum  environments  or  harsh  chemicals.12  This  means  that  surface 

modification is most likely to be carried out at the end of the fabrication process, i.e. after the release of 

the  nanostructures.  Hence,  care  must  be  taken  when  delivering  probe  molecules  onto  freestanding 

fragile structures to keep the integrity of the sensor. 

Moreover,  the  functionalization  of  large  array  of  NEMS  devices  implies  that  submicron  patterns  can 

be created at  large-scale. Thus,  the most common functionalization method relying on  the  immersion of 

the  entire  sample  into  a  dedicated  biochemical  solution  is  not  fulfilling  the  need  to  create  localized 

biofunctionalized  areas.13  Lately,  many  techniques  have  been  proposed  to  locally  biofunctionalize 

 

3 

microscale  sensors,  such as  ink-jet printing14 and  the use of  separate microcapillaries.15 However,  these 

approaches  are  either not  likely  to produce  sub-microns patterns nor  to be  scaled up  to  create  large  and 

multiplexed  arrays.  Photolithographic  light-directed  synthesis,16  already  used  for  gene  chip  fabrication, 

are  appropriate  for  large  multiplexed  arrays,  but  the  diffraction  limit  makes  it  difficult  to  apply  to 

nanoscale  patterning.  Liquid  drop  dispensers  have  also  been  demonstrated  as  useful  tools  for  the 

biofunctionalization of MEMS sensors,17 however,  the capillary  forces  induced when retracting  the  tool 

from  the  surface  are  most  likely  large  enough  to  damage  nanostructures.  Other  technologies  used  to 

create  nanoscale  patterns  by  means  of  tip-based  liquid  or  molecular  transfer,  such  as  miniaturized 

fountain  pen18,  19  and  scanning-probes,20  could  possibly  address 

the 

issues  related 

to 

the 

biofunctionalization  of  fragile  nanostructures,  even  if  the  creation  of  patterns  on  large  areas  seems 

technically difficult  to  implement. Finally, one  can  think of using  interesting  approaches  relying on  the 

use  of  localized  electrochemical  reactions  induced  at  the  surface  of  addressable  electrodes,21,  22  despite 

the problems foreseen to be raised by the high-multiplexing requirements of the electrode array in order 

to access individual or groups of nanostructures. 

In  this  paper,  we  propose  to  use  microcontact  printing,23  which  is  a  highly  parallel  deposition 

technology24  with  nanoscale  resolution,25  for  the  localized  biofunctionalization  of  large-scale  arrays  of 

nanostructures.  μCP  is  a  “dry”  deposition  technology  known  to  keep  biomolecules  fully  active  after 

deposition. Our proposed method relies on a modified µCP process, where  the trenches in the stamp are 

actually  used  to  transfer  the  molecules  of  interest,  while  the  base  of  the  stamp  provides  mechanical 

support during  the printing  step and can additionally be used  to deposit blocking molecules on  the non-

reactive  parts  of  the  array.  The  stamp  is  designed  so  that  when  placed  on  a  surface,  the  bottom  of  the 

trenches  comes  into  contact  with  that  surface  if  a  pressure  is  applied,  thus  allowing  molecular  transfer 

without inducing too much force onto the structure to functionalize.26 

The 

functionalization  process, 

illustrated 

in 

the  Figure  1, 

includes 

two 

stages: 

the 

polydimethylsiloxane  (PDMS)  stamp preparation and  inking  and  the actual printing or  transfer process. 

First, the PDMS stamp is incubated with the probe biomolecules, thus covering the entire stamp surface 

 

4 

(the  top  and  bottom  of  the  trenches).  In  order  to  remove  probe molecules  from  the  top  of  the  trenches, 

i.e. where the stamp is supposed to contact the non-reactive areas of the chip to functionalize, the stamp 

is  brought  into  contact  with  a  bare  glass  substrate.  Few  contacts  on  clean  glass  slides  are  usually 

operated  in order  to ensure  that no  traces of molecules are  left at  the surface of  the stamp. This step, so-

called  “cleaning  step”,  results  in  the  presence  of  biomolecules  solely  into  the  trenches  of  the  stamp. 

Thus,  during  this  cleaning  step,  it  is  crucial  to  make  sure  that  the  PDMS  patterned  trenches  do  not 

collapse  in  order  to  keep  the  bottom  of  the  trenches  correctly  inked.  Then,  in  order  to  deposit  an  anti-

fouling layer outside the biofunctional patterns, the stamp is incubated with a surface-blocking molecule 

(Figure 1B). The addition of  this  inking  step  leads, after print,  to  the patterning of probe molecules and 

anti-fouling agents  in a  single,  self-aligned  step. This method  is  thus especially  suited  to  the  single-step 

functionalization  and passivation  of planar  structures,  such  as membranes. Alternatively,  the deposition 

of  the  anti-fouling  layer  can  also  be  carried  out  in  a  batch  process,  after  functionalizing  the  array  of 

nanostructures  (Figure  1A).  Transfer  of  the molecules  from  the  stamp  onto  the  chip  to  functionalize  is 

finally  achieved  by  bringing  the  stamp  into  contact  with  the  array  of  NEMS,  after  aligning  features 

patterned  on  both  surfaces  and  deforming  the  stamp  under  pressure  until  the  bottom  of  the  cavities 

gently  touches  the  nanostructures.  Deforming  the  stamp  and  inducing  the  collapse  of  the  trenches  to 

transfer  biomolecules  ensures  that  a minimum  pressure  is  applied  onto  the  structures  and  thus  prevents 

any damage or breakage of the NEMS. 

In  the  present  work,  we  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  our  approach  by  biofunctionalizing  arrays  of 

freestanding nanocantilevers. More than 105 nanocantilevers were fabricated onto 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm chips 

from  silicon-on-insulator  wafers  using  standard  microfabrication  techniques,  i.e.  UV  stepper 

photolithography,  silicon  reactive  ion  etching  and  SiO2  wet  etching  in  buffered  oxide  etch  (see 

Supporting  Information).  Fabricated  cantilevers  with  typical  dimensions  of  8  µm  in  length,  2.6  µm  in 

width  and  340  nm  in  thickness  are  freestanding  above  15  µm  x  12.5  µm  x  1  µm  long,  wide  and  deep 

cavities  (Figure  2a).  The  PDMS  stamp  used  for  biofunctionalization  purposes  was  designed  to  fit  the 

pitch of the nanocantilever array and the size of the patterned trenches was adjusted to the dimensions of 

 

5 

the cavity under each nanocantilever,  i.e. 15 µm x 12.5 µm, such as  to  increase alignment efficiency.  In 

that  case,  even  with  a  misalignment  of  several  microns,  which  is  the  minimum  typical  tolerance  of 

alignment  tools found  in academic  labs,  the probe biomolecules are still  transferred  to  the entire surface 

of  the  nanocantilevers  (since  the  patterning  area  is  larger  than  each  cantilever).  In  fact  the  only 

alignment  issue could originate  from a discrepancy between  the designed  stamp and  its actual  size after 

de-molding:  indeed,  due  to  the  shrinkage  of  the  polymer  during  the  baking  step,  the  pattern  size  of 

fabricated stamps typically shrinks by about 1%. Even if this effect is not likely to affect printing results 

for  most  applications,  the  dimension  compliance  cannot  be  ensured  when  working  with  arrays  of 

thousands of nanocantilevers  spanning over  few  centimeters:  thus even  if  the  stamp  is perfectly  aligned 

along  one  side  of  the  array,  the  patterns  would  be  shifted  from  few  lines  or  columns  on  the  opposite 

side. Hence, to avert this shrinkage effect, we have created composite stamps consisting of patterned 1.5 

cm × 1.5 cm × 400 µm PDMS films glued to 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1 mm thick glass slides by placing these 

glass  slides  in  a dedicated  set-up during  the PDMS  casting onto  silicon master molds  (Figure S1). This 

fabrication trick resulted in a stamp deformation lower than 0.05%. 

Alexa  Fluor  660  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  (IgG1)  and  albumin  from  bovine  serum  (BSA)  fluorescein 

conjugate  were  printed  in  a  single  self-aligned  step  respectively  onto  and  around  large  arrays  of 

nanocantilevers  using  the  printing  process  described  in  Figure  1B.  For  this  purpose,  the  fabricated 

PDMS  stamp  was  firstly  inked  with  a  400  µg/mL  Alexa  Fluor  660  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  in  1X 

Phosphate  Buffered  Saline  (PBS)  solution  during  2  min,  rinsed  and  dried.  It  was  then  inked  with  a  1 

mg/mL  BSA  solution  for  2  min  after  stamping  several  times  onto  a  bare  glass  slide  to  remove  all  the 

IgG1  at  the  extruded  surface  of  the  stamp  (i.e.  not  within  the  trenches).  After  rinsing  and  drying  the 

stamp,  it  was  aligned  with  the  array  of  nanocantilevers  and  then  gently  brought  into  contact  with  the 

NEMS  chip,  resulting  in  the  adhesion  of  the  PDMS  stamp  at  the  surface  of  the  chip  and  thus  in  the 

transfer of BSA molecules around the nanostructures. Finally, the transfer of donkey anti-goat IgG from 

the  stamp  to  the  nanocantilevers  was  achieved  by  applying  a  pressure  onto  the  stamp  to  induce  the 

deformation of the patterned trenches so that the PDMS would contact the cantilevers, as clearly seen in 

 

6 

the movie M1. The pressure was applied by placing the stamp and the NEMS chip within a vice and the 

pressure  level  and  the duration of  the  print were  assessed by  studying  the  level of  fluorescence  emitted 

by  the  transferred  molecules  (i.e.  by  seeking  and  obtaining  a  maximum  level  of  fluorescence, 

comparable  to  the  one  resulting  from  printing  onto  a  planar  SiO2  surface)  while  avoiding  breaking  the 

nanocantilevers.  The  as-biofunctionalized  arrays  of  nanocantilevers  were  imaged  by  fluorescence 

microscopy using two filter sets dedicated to the observation of the Alexa Fluor 660 and the Fluorescein 

dyes  (Figure  2b). As  can  be  seen  in  the  inset  of  Figure  2b,  the  levels  of  raw  fluorescence  indicate  that 

indeed  the  IgG1  is  solely  patterned  onto  the  nanocantilevers,  while  the  entire  remaining  surface  of  the 

chip  is  covered with  BSA molecules.  These  results  indicate  the  proper  deposition  of  the  probe  and  the 

anti-fouling  biomolecules  at  the  desired  location  of  the  chip,  without  apparent  breakage  of  the 

nanocantilevers. 

Next,  to  demonstrate  the  bioactivity  of  the  deposited  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  and  the  anti-fouling 

property  of  the  BSA  layer,  we  carried  out  biodetection  experiments  involving  exposure  to  goat  anti-

mouse  IgG  (Specific  IgG2)  and  donkey  anti-mouse  IgG  (Non-specific  IgG2),  inducing  respectively 

specific and non-specific interactions with the patterned IgG1. For the purpose of these experiments, the 

surface  blocking  step  was  carried  out  in  a  batch  mode,  following  the  process  displayed  in  Figure  1A, 

rather  than using  the double  stamp  transfer.  Indeed,  the  single  and  self-aligned biofunctionalization and 

passivation  stamp  process,  which  is  perfectly  suited  for  planar  surfaces  (e.g.  nanomembranes  or 

nanoelectrodes), does not enable  the deposition of molecules underneath  the nanocantilevers and  inside 

the  cavities:  these  surfaces  would  not  be  properly  blocked  and  would  thus  be  subject  to  non-specific 

adsorption of  the  incubated molecules,  leading  to  false positive response of a mass sensor (which  is our 

chosen  detection  scheme)  due  to  the  added  mass  at  the  back-side  surface  of  the  nanocantilevers. 

Following  IgG1  print  onto  the  cantilever  top  surface  and  a  batch  immobilization  of  BSA  molecules 

everywhere else (i.e. additionally at the bottom of the cavities and underneath the cantilevers), a specific 

recognition  of  the  printed  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  was  carried  out  by  incubating  the  functionalized  chips 

in  a  50  µg/mL Alexa  Fluor  488  goat  anti-mouse  IgG  solution  for  2  h. Other  functionalized  chips  were 

 

7 

also  incubated  in  a  50  µg/mL  Alexa  Fluor  488  donkey  anti-mouse  solution  for  control  experiments. 

After  incubation,  the NEMS chips were  thoroughly washed 10  times with 1 mL degassed PBS solution, 

soaked  into  PBS  for  45  min,  then  rinsed  10  times  with  degassed  DI  water  and  finally  dried  with  a 

nitrogen gun before fluorescence  imaging. The use of degassed solutions for  the batch deposition of  the 

anti-fouling  layer  as  well  as  for  incubation  with  specific  and  non-specific  IgG2  prevented  bubble 

formation into the cavities underneath the nanocantilevers, thus allowing the entire surface of the chip to 

contact  the  solutions  and  avoiding  accumulation  of  molecules  at  the  bubble  contact  lines  as  well  as 

inhomogeneity and poor efficiency of the rinsing steps. 

The  results of  the  incubation  experiments  are  resumed  in Figure 3. Fluorescence  images  in  Figure  3a 

show  the  adequate  immobilization  of  Alexa  Fluor  660  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  at  the  surface  of  the 

nanocantilevers  that  cannot  be  seen  using  the  filter  cube  dedicated  to  the  observation  Alexa  Fluor  488 

labeled  specific and non-specific  IgG2. Non-fluorescently  labeled BSA was deliberately chosen  for  this 

experiment  to avoid disrupting  the signal emitted by  the Alexa Fluor 488 of  the secondary  IgG2. Figure 

3b,  top  and  bottom,  shows  fluorescence  images  obtained  using  the  filter  sets  dedicated  to  the  Alexa 

Fluor 488 after  incubation respectively with non-specific and specific  IgG2. While a slight non-specific 

interaction  is observed all over  the chip,  the specific  interaction can clearly be seen at  the surface of  the 

nanocantilevers,  thus  demonstrating  the  adequate  passivation  of  the  chip  and  the  bioactivity  of  the 

deposited IgG1 at the nanocantilevers’ surface. Evidence of these results is reinforced when plotting the 

increase  of  fluorescence  signals  averaged  over  the  blocked  and  functionalized  areas  of  a  single  chip 

before and after  incubation with  IgG2 (Figure 3c).  Indeed,  the  increase of  fluorescence at  the surface of 

the  nanocantilevers  is meaningfully  larger  in  the  case of  specific  interaction with  a high  signal  to  noise 

ratio, while the fluorescence of the negative control is comparable to the level of non-specific adsorption 

observed  on  the  BSA  layers  for  both  specific  and  non-specific  molecules.  Thus,  the  nanocantilevers 

biofunctionalized with our modified µCP method are adequately proven to work as biosensors. 

Finally,  measurements  of  the  resonant  frequency  and  the  quality  factor  corresponding  to  the 

fundamental  mode  of  vibration  of  the  functionalized  nanocantilevers  were  then  conducted  to  address 

 

8 

two questions: do  the nanocantilevers preserve  their mechanical  integrity once  the functionalization and 

the  successive  incubation  steps have been done? Are  the calculated mean added masses  -  relative  to  the 

resonant frequency shifts measured before functionalizing  the nanocantilevers and after  incubating with 

the specific IgG - relevant from a biological point of view? 

In  order  to  answer  these  questions,  we  introduce  mechanical  considerations  as  a  basis  for  the 

interpretation  of  the  measurements  performed  on  the  nanocantilevers  in  a  dynamic  regime.  When 

biological molecules are added onto the surface of a cantilever, the total effective mass increases by ∆m 

resulting in a proportional shift of the NEMS resonant frequency ∆f, given by: 

 

(1) 

where  f0  and  Meff  are  the  resonant  frequency  and  the  effective  modal  mass  of  the  cantilever. 

Theoretically,  the  resonant  frequency  and  the  effective  modal  mass  of  the  designed  cantilevers  are 

respectively  equal  to 6.87 MHz  and 4.1  pg.  In order  to  estimate  a mean mass  added  on our  cantilevers, 

we  have  used  the  resonant  frequency  f0  measured  after  removal  of  the  biological  layers,  the  measured 

resonant  frequency  change,  and  the  effective  modal  mass  estimated  from  the  cantilever  dimensions. 

Experimentally,  after  fluorescence  observation  and  measurement  of  the  cantilever  resonant  frequency, 

the  biological  layers  were  completely  removed  by  immersing  the  NEMS  chips  into  a  Piranha  bath 

during 10 min. 

The  question  of  the  mechanical  integrity  was  thoroughly  investigated  by  performing  systematic 

resonant  frequency  and  quality  factor  measurements  on  16  nanocantilevers  randomly  chosen  among 

thousands  of  structures  of  a  single  functionalized  array.  The  main  and  first  conclusion  is  that  the 

nanostructures  undergo  the  different  biological  treatments without  damage,  i.e.  these  structures  are  not 

broken and are still vibrating. Moreover, the resonant frequency and corresponding quality factor values 

decrease  in  a  reproducible  way,  as  expected,  after  loading  of  the  biological  matter  (Figure  4).  Indeed, 

the  quality  factor  decrease  is  attributed  to  a  damping  effect  induced  by  presence  of  the  biological  layer 

on  top  the  surface  of  the  nanocantilevers,  while  the  resonant  frequency  systematic  drop  is  due  to  total 

 

9 

mass  added  during  the  biological  protocol  sequences.  The  latter  assumption  neglects  the  surface  stress 

effects  that  the  biomolecules  may  exert  onto  the  dynamic  behavior  of  the  nanocantilevers.  This 

hypothesis  is  supported by  the  fact  that  the  thickness of  the  transferred material by µCP onto  the  active 

area of one nanocantilever represents only a tiny fraction of its overall thickness.27 

The  question  related  to  the  biological  relevance  of  the  mean  added  mass  value  is  rather  delicate  to 

address from a quantitative point of view. Table 1 provides the mean measured resonant frequency shift, 

the  corresponding mean  added mass  per  unit  area,  and  the  relative mean  variation  of measured  quality 

factor  values  for  16  nanocantilevers  after  biofunctionalization with  the  IgG1,  incubation with  the  BSA 

protein  and  interaction  with  the  specific  IgG2.  The  resonant  frequencies  and  quality  factors  of  bare 

nanocantilevers  considered  as  reference  values  are  obtained  after  removing  the  biological  layers.  The 

standard  deviation  values  are  indicated  in  the  brackets  along with  each  of  the measured  and  calculated 

parameters indicated above. 

A  qualitative  analysis  of  the  Table  1  confirms  that  mass-loaded  cantilevers  exhibit  a  simultaneous 

decrease  of  resonant  frequency  and  of  the  quality  factor.  Moreover,  the  mass  addition  value  of  18,6 

fg/µm2  is  significantly  higher  than  the  one  previously  reported  after  solely  printing  the  IgG1,  i.e.  11.7 

fg/µm2,26 which is in accordance with the extra mass due to the BSA molecules adsorbed underneath the 

cantilevers  and  the  goat  anti-mouse  IgG  specifically  interacting  with  the  bioactive  layer.  Ideal 

comparison  between  the  resonant  frequency  of  a  same  cantilever  measured  after  each  biological 

protocol  step,  i.e.  after  biofunctionalization,  surface  blocking  and  incubation,  would  provide  data 

directly  proving  the  actual  biosensing  capability  of  our  functionalized  nanocantilever  resonators. 

However,  this  approach  is  banned  because  of  the  modus  operandi  used  to  perform  the  measurements. 

Due  to  the  vacuum  conditions  imposed  by  the  Fabry-Perot  experimental  set-up,  it  would  be  risky  to 

assume  that  the  biological molecules  grafted  onto  the  nanocantilevers  are  not  irreversibly  denatured  or 

damaged  once  submitted  to  such  extreme  conditions  after  the  dynamic  characterizations.  To  prevent 

arguable  conclusions  in  case  of  biological  protocols  taking  place  onto  the  same  chip  that  necessarily 

undergoes back-and-forth  steps between vacuum and  liquid media, we deliberately decided  to carry out 

 

10 

the  entire  biological  protocol  before  performing  the  resonant  frequency  measurements,  and  then  to 

remove  the  final biological arrangement  to obtain  the  initial  resonant  frequency. For  this  reason, we are 

currently unable  to provide direct comparison of  resonant  frequency  shifts  induced by  the  incubation of 

specific  and  non-specific  interacting  molecules,  since  the  added  mass  due  to  the  printed  IgG1  and 

incubated  BSA  cannot  be  measured  directly  before  the  revelation  steps.  One  way  to  prevent  such  a 

critical  experimental  configuration  would  be  to  perform  all  biological  reactions  and  subsequent 

measurements  in  liquid  media  and  in  real-time,  as  classically  done  with  tools  such  as  quartz 

microbalance.28  However,  it  has  become  obvious  that  the  nanocantilever  geometry  is  fundamentally 

inadequate to dynamic sensing in liquid due to the dramatic impact of the surrounding medium onto the 

quality  factor  and  as  a  result  onto  the minimum  detectable mass  by  such  structures. With  the  advent  of 

new NEMS  geometries more  adapted  to  biosensing  in  liquid media, we  are  foreseeing  to  provide  soon 

biofunctionalized integrated NEMS sensors by means of the patterning approach presented in this paper. 

Still, with these preliminary results, supported by  fluorescence microscopy, we can safely conclude  that 

the biofunctionalization  technique presented here  is a first resolute step  towards setting-up bioNEMS as 

the ultimate mechanical systems for complex and multiplexed biosensing operations. 

In this paper, we have presented a technique for the biofunctionalization and the surface blocking of a 

large  array of nanostructures based on  a  single,  self-aligned µCP process. Our method  relies on  the use 

of a PDMS stamp displaying patterns inked with probe and anti-fouling molecules at the bottom and the 

top  of  the  trenches,  respectively.  While  the  anti-fouling  layer  is  transferred  upon  direct  contact  of  the 

stamp with  the  surface  of  the  chip,  probe  biomolecules  are  delivered  by  deforming  the  trenches  so  that 

the  PDMS  bottom  patterns  come  into  contact  with  the  nanostructures.  As  a  proof  of  concept,  we  have 

functionalized  arrays  of  more  than  105  nanocantilevers/cm2 with  donkey  anti-goat  IgG,  while  blocking 

the  remaining  chip  surface  with  BSA.  The  bioactivity  an  anti-fouling  properties  of  the  deposited 

molecules  were  assessed  by  incubating  the  NEMS  chips  with  goat  anti-mouse  IgG  and  donkey  anti-

mouse IgG, inducing specific and non-specific recognition of the printed IgG, following by fluorescence 

observations.  Next,  measurement  of  the  nanocantilever  resonant  frequency  demonstrated  that  the 

 

11 

nanostructures  retain  their mechanical  integrity  and  thus  their  sensing  capability,  after  the  printing  and 

the 

incubation  steps.  We  believe 

that 

the 

technique  presented 

in 

this  paper  answers 

the 

biofunctionalization  challenge  of  nanostructures  for  the  development  of  future  generation  of  functional 

bioNEMS. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  French  National  Agency  for  Research  (program  ANR/PNANO  2008,  project  NEMSPIEZO 

‘ANR-08-NANO-015’) is gratefully acknowledged for financial support. 

Supporting Information. 

Details  of  the  materials  and  methods  concerning  (1)  the  fabrication  of  the  arrays  of  silicon 

nanocantilevers,  (2)  the  fabrication  of  the  PDMS  stamps,  (3)  the  printing  process,  (4)  the  molecular 

incubation  and  imaging  protocols  and  (4)  the  measurement  of  the  nanocantilever  resonant  frequency. 

Figure  S1  showing  schematics  of  the  stamp  fabrication  using  a  dedicated  stainless  steel  set-up.  Movie 

M1 displaying a real-time video of the printing process. 

 

 

Figure 1. Schematics of  the NEMS functionalization process using a PDMS stamp;  two approaches can 

be  used:  A.  Surface  functionalization  by  microcontact  printing  followed  by  blocking  the  remaining 

 

12 

surfaces  with  a  batch  process.  B.  Surface  functionalization  and  passivation  both  carried  out  by 

microcontact printing.  (1)  Inking  the  stamp with  the desired molecules  (IgG1).  (2) Washing  and drying 

the stamp. (3) Cleaning outside  the stamp grooves,  i.e. removing  the molecules from  the stamp base, by 

carrying multiple prints. (3B)  Inking the stamp with the anti-fouling molecules (BSA). (4) Printing after 

aligning  the  stamp  and  the  chip.  (4A)  Incubating  the  chip  with  the  anti-fouling  molecule  (BSA).  (5) 

Result of the NEMS biofunctionalization process. 

 

 

 

13 

Figure  2.  Biofunctionalized  arrays  of  nanocantilevers.  (a)  Scanning  electron  microscopy  images  of 

fabricated  silicon  nanocantilevers.  (b)  Superimposed  fluorescence  pictures  (taken  with  two  dedicated 

filter sets) of an array of nanocantilevers functionalized after printing  the Alexa Fluor 660  IgG1 and  the 

Fluorescein-BSA  in  a  single  step  (scale  bar:  50µm). The  inset  provides  a  zoom  of  the  array  along with 

the fluorescence profiles measured with the two filters. 

 

 
Figure  3.  Validation  of  the  bioactivity  of  the  functionalized  NEMS  array  using  fluorescence 

microscopy:  (a)  Fluorescence  images  of  the  printed  IgG1  using  the  filter  sets  respectively  dedicated  to 

observe  the  Alexa  660  and  the  Alexa  488  fluorophores  (top  and  bottom),  (b)  Fluorescence  images  of 

biofunctionalized  chips  after  incubation with  the  specific  IgG2  and  non-specific  IgG2  (top  and  bottom, 

respectively),  and  (c)  Graph  comparing  the  mean  increase  of  fluorescence  signal  due  to  specific  and 

non-specific tagged IgG2 incubation, on the BSA layer and on the biofunctionalized cantilevers. 

 

14 

 
Figure  4.  Resonant  frequency  curves  of  a  single  nanocantilever  (a)  after  IgG1  print  followed  by  the 

detection of specific IgG2, and (b) after removing all the printed and captured biomolecules. 

Mean resonant frequency shift 
[kHz] 
-97,8 (15,5) 

Mean added mass 
[fg/µm2] 
18,6 (3) 

Mean quality factor shift 
[%] 
-66,2 (10,2) 

 
Table  1.  Measured  resonant  frequency  shift  and  quality  factor  drop  induced  by  the  functionalization 

(µCP)  and  passivation  (batch)  steps  followed  by  biological  recognition  with  the  specific  secondary 

IgG2.  Frequency  and  quality  factor  shifts  were  calculated  for  16  nanocantilevers  of  a  single  array  and 

then  averaged  (the  associated  standard  deviation  is  given within  the  brackets). The  resulting  calculated 

added mass is also provided in this table. 

REFERENCES 

1.  Blick, R. H.; Qin, H.; Kim, H.-S.; Marsland, R. New Journal of Physics 2007, 9. 

2.  Naik, A. K.; Hanay, M. S.; Hiebert, W. K.; Feng, X. L.; Roukes, M. L. Nature Nanotechnology 

2009, 4, (7), 445-450. 

3. 

Jensen, K.; Kim, K.; Zettl, A. Nature Nanotechnology 2008, 3, (9), 533-537. 

4.  Ekinci, K. L.; Yang, Y. T.; Roukes, M. L. Journal of Applied Physics 2004, 95, (5), 2682-2689. 

5. 

Ilic, B.; Yang, Y.; Craighead, H. G. Applied Physics Letters 2004, 85, (13), 2604-2606. 

 

15 

6. 

Ilic, B.; Yang, Y.; Aubin, K.; Reichenbach, R.; Krylov, S.; Craighead, H. G. Nano Letters 2005, 

5, (5), 925-929. 

7. 

Sheehan, P. E.; Whitman, L. J. Nano Letters 2005, 5, (4), 803-807. 

8.  Nair, P. R.; Alam, M. A. Applied Physics Letters 2006, 88, (23). 

9. 

Sampathkumar, A.; Ekinci, K. L.; Murray, T. W. Nano Letters 2011, 11, (3), 1014-1019. 

10.  Chalmeau, J.; Thibault, C.; Carcenac, F.; Vieu, C. Applied Physics Letters 2008, 93, (13). 

11.  Arlett, J. L.; Myers, E. B.; Roukes, M. L. Nature Nanotechnology 2011, 6, (4), 203-215. 

12.  Leïchlé,  T.;  Lin,  Y.-L.;  Chiang,  P.-C.;  Hu,  S.-M.;  Liao,  K.-T.;  Chou,  C.-F.  Sensors  and 

Actuators b- Chemical 2012, 161, (1), 805-810. 

13.  Fischer,  L. M.; Wright, V. A.; Guthy, C.; Yang, N.; McDermott, M. T.; Buriak,  J. M.; Evoy, S. 

Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical 2008, 134, (2), 613-617. 

14.  Bietsch,  A.;  Zhang,  J.  Y.;  Hegner,  M.;  Lang,  H.  P.;  Gerber,  C.  Nanotechnology  2004,  15,  (8), 

873-880. 

15.  McKendry,  R.;  Zhang,  J.  Y.;  Arntz,  Y.;  Strunz,  T.;  Hegner,  M.;  Lang,  H.  P.;  Baller,  M.  K.; 

Certa, U.; Meyer, E.; Guntherodt, H. J.; Gerber, C. Proceedings of  the National Academy of Sciences of 

the United States of America 2002, 99, (15), 9783-9788. 

16.  Pease,  A.  C.;  Solas,  D.;  Sullivan,  E.  J.;  Cronin,  M.  T.;  Holmes,  C.  P.;  Fodor,  S.  P.  A. 

Proceedings of  the National Academy of Sciences of  the United States of America 1994, 91, (11), 5022-

5026. 

17.  Vandevelde,  F.;  Leichle,  T.;  Ayela,  C.;  Bergaud,  C.;  Nicu,  L.;  Haupt,  K.  Langmuir  2007,  23, 

(12), 6490-6493. 

 

16 

18.  Meister,  A.;  Liley,  M.;  Brugger,  J.;  Pugin,  R.;  Heinzelmann,  H.  Applied  Physics  Letters  2004, 

85, (25), 6260-6262. 

19.  Saya,  D.;  Leichle,  T.;  Pourciel,  J.  B.;  Bergaud,  C.;  Nicu,  L.  Journal  of  Micromechanics  and 

Microengineering 2007, 17, (1), N1-N5. 

20.  NanoInk Application Note: Biosensor Functionalization.  

21.  Harper,  J.  C.;  Polsky,  R.; Dirk,  S. M.; Wheeler, D.  R.;  Brozik,  S. M.  Electroanalysis  2007,  19, 

(12), 1268-1274. 

22.  Descamps, E.; Leichle, T.; Corso, B.; Laurent, S.; Mailley, P.; Nicu, L.; Livache, T.; Bergaud, C. 

Advanced Materials 2007, 19, (14), 1816-+. 

23.  Kumar, A.; Whitesides, G. M. Applied Physics Letters 1993, 63, (14), 2002-2004. 

24.  Decre,  M.  M.  J.;  Schneider,  R.;  Burdinski,  D.;  Schellekens,  J.;  Saalmink,  M.;  Dona,  R. 

Nontraditional Approaches to Patterning 2004, 59-61. 

25.  Gu,  J.;  Xiao,  X.;  Takulapalli,  B.  R.;  Morrison,  M.  E.;  Zhang,  P.;  Zenhausern,  F.  Journal  of 

Vacuum Science & Technology B 2008, 26, (6), 1860-1865. 

26.  Guillon,  S.;  Salomon,  S.;  Seichepine,  F.;  Dezest,  D.;  Mathieu,  F.;  Bouchier,  A.;  Mazenq,  L.; 

Thibault,  C.;  Vieu,  C.;  Leïchlé,  T.;  Nicu,  L.  Sensors  and  Actuators  b-  Chemical  2012,  161,  (1),  1135-

1138. 

27.  Tamayo, J.; Ramos, D.; Mertens, J.; Calleja, M. Applied Physics Letters 2006, 89, (22). 

28.  Okahata, Y.; Kawase, M.; Niikura, K.; Ohtake, F.; Furusawa, H.; Ebara, Y. Analytical Chemistry 

1998, 70, (7), 1288-1296. 

 

 

17 

Supporting Information 
 
Materials 
A21083 Alexa Fluor 660 donkey anti-goat  IgG  (IgG1), A11001 Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse  IgG 
(Specific  IgG2),  and  A21202  Alexa  Fluor  488  donkey  anti-mouse  IgG  (Non-specific  IgG2)  were 
purchased  from  Invitrogen  and  diluted  in  Phosphate  Buffered  Saline  (PBS)  1X  solution  at  the 
respective  concentrations  of  400  µg/mL,  50  µg/mL,  and  50  µg/mL.  Albumin  from  bovine  serum 
(BSA)  and  A23015  BSA  fluorescein  conjugate  were  purchased  from  Sigma  and  Invitrogen, 
respectively, and were both diluted at a final concentration of 1 mg/mL in 1X PBS. 
 
Fabrication of NEMS arrays 
Silicon  on  insulator  (SOI)  wafers  were  used  as  substrates  for  the  fabrication  of  the  nanocantilevers’ 
arrays. From SOI wafers (340 nm thick P-type Si/1 µm SiO2/525 µm thick Si, Soitec), cantilevers with 
controllable  thickness  can  be  fabricated  and  released  in  aqueous  solution  without  structure  sticking 
issues.  The  nanocantilevers  were  patterned  using  a  UV  stepper  photo  repeater  (I  Line  CANON  FPA 
3000  i4/i5,  N.A.  0.63)  via  a  600  nm  thick  positive  photoresist  layer  (ECI).  The  top  silicon  layer  was 
etched  by  reactive  ion  etching  (RIE,  Alcatel  AMS4200)  until  the  intermediate  SiO2  layer  appeared. 
The  sacrificial SiO2  layer was  then etched by dipping  the wafer  in a buffered hydrofluoric acid  (BHF) 
solution  leading  to  the  release  of  the  nanocantilevers.  Finally,  a  9  nm  thick  oxide  layer was  grown  at 
the  surface  of  the  nanostructures  by  thermally  oxidizing  the  chips  in  a  dedicated  furnace.  Fabricated 
cantilevers are 8 µm long, 2.6 µm  wide and 340 nm thick. Each 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm chip holds more than 
105 nanostructures. 
 
Fabrication of PDMS stamps 
The  polydimethylsiloxane  (PDMS)  stamps  were  fabricated  using  Sylgard  184  products  with  a  1:10 
ratio  of  curing  agent  and  prepolymer.  After  mixing  the  two  reagents,  the  mixture  was  carefully 
degassed.  Standard  100  mm  silicon  wafers  were  used  as  master  molds  and  the  patterns  were  created 
using  optical  photolithography  followed  by  a  340  nm  deep  reactive  ion  etching  (DRIE)  step.  The 
master  molds  were  silanized  using  OctadecylTrichloroSilane  (OTS,  Sigma,  1%  in  Xylene).  The 
PDMS mixture was  injected onto  the master mold  in a dedicated  stainless  steel set-up and cured at 60 
°C  for  4  h.  Glass  slides  were  placed  in  the  set-up  to  create  precise  composite  stamps  consisting  of 
patterned  1.5  cm  ×  1.5  cm  ×  400  µm  PDMS  films  glued  to  the  1.5  cm  ×  1.5  cm  ×  1  mm  thick  glass 
slides (Figure S1). 
 
Printing process 
Freshly  prepared  PDMS  stamps  were  first  rinsed  10  times  with  1  mL  deionized  (DI)  water  and  then 
dried with  a  nitrogen  gun.  The  stamps were  inked  by  incubation  during  2 min  in  a  400  µg/mL Alexa 

Fluor  660  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  1X  Phosphate  Buffered  Saline  (PBS)  solution.  The  stamps  were 
rinsed  10  times with  1 mL  PBS  solution,  10  times with  1 mL with DI water,  dried with  nitrogen  and 
then printed 6  times onto bare glass  slides  to  remove all antibodies at  the  surface of  the  stamps,  i.e. at 
the  top  of  the  trenches.  To  print  the  anti-fouling  layer  and  the  probe  biomolecules  in  a  single  step 
(Figure  1B),  stamps  were  additionally  incubated  for  2  min  in  a  1  mg/mL  BSA  solution,  then  rinsed 
and dried following the above-described procedure. Immediately after inking, the stamps were aligned 
with  the  oxygen  plasma  cleaned  1.5  cm  ×  1.5  cm NEMS  chips  using  a microscope  and  an  automated 
chuck  (Karl  Suss  PA200  set-up).  The  alignment  procedures  were  assisted  by  Moiré  patterns  to 
minimize  alignment  errors.  The  stamps  and  the  chips  were  gently  brought  into  contact  and  a 
backpressure  was  applied  onto  the  stamps  during  30  min  in  order  to  deform  the  patterns  so  that  the 
bottom  of  the  trenches  could  touch  the  nanocantilevers.  The  deposition  of  the  anti-fouling  layer  in  a 
batch process was carried out by incubating the NEMS chips in a degassed 1 mg/mL BSA solution for 
30  min.  The  chips  were  then  rinsed  10  times  with  1  mL  degassed  PBS  solution,  10  times  with  1  mL 
degassed DI water and then dried with a nitrogen gun. 
 
Molecular recognition and imaging 
For  biodetection  purposes,  the  donkey  anti-goat  IgG  functionalized  NEMS  chips  were  incubated  in  a 
50  µg/mL  Alexa  Fluor  488  goat  anti-mouse  IgG  solution  or  in  a  50  µg/mL  Alexa  Fluor  488  donkey 
anti-mouse  IgG  solution  for 2 h. After  incubation,  the NEMS  chips were  thoroughly washed 10  times 
with  1  mL  degassed  PBS  solution.  The  chips  were  then  soaked  in  a  beaker  containing  50  mL  PBS 
solution and agitated with an orbital shaker (Heidolph Instruments Rotamax) at 50 rpm during 45 min. 
The  samples  were  then  rinsed  10  times  with  1  mL  degassed  DI  water  and  dried  with  a  nitrogen  gun. 
Complete  removal  of  the  biological  layers  from  the  nanocantilevers  was  achieved  by  immersing  the 
NEMS chips into a Piranha bath during 10 min. 
Fluorescence  images  were  acquired  using  an  Olympus  IX70  inverted  microscope,  a  20X  objective 
(N.A. 0.40, Olympus),  two filter sets dedicated  to  the observation of Alexa Fluor 660 and Alexa Fluor 
488  /  Fluorescein  dyes  (U-M41008  from  Chroma  and  U-MWIB3  from  Olympus,  respectively)  and  a 
Clara CCD ANDOR camera (DR-328G-C01-SIL, 5 s acquisition time). 
 
Measurement of NEMS resonant frequency 
The nanocantilever resonant frequencies were measured in vacuum using a Fabry-Perot interferometry 
bench.  The  NEMS  chips  were  mounted  on  a  piezoelectric  disk,  electrically  actuated  by  a  network 
analyzer (Agilent 4395A) and coupled to an in-house high-frequency amplifier. The device was placed 
inside  a  vacuum  chamber  pumped  down  to  10-6  mbar  at  room  temperature.  A  30  mW  He-Ne  laser 
(Melles Griot) was  focused on  the nanostructures using a beam expander and a  long working distance 
microscope  objective  (20X,  N.A.  0.28),  leading  to  a  3  µm  minimal  beam  size.  Interferences  were 

detected by a photodetector (New Focus 1601) connected to the network analyzer to track the response 
of single nanocantilevers at the excitation frequency. 
 
 
 

 

 
Figure S1. Schematics of the stamp fabrication using a dedicated stainless steel set-up. 
 
 
Movie  M1.  Real-time  video  of  the  printing  process.  After  bringing  the  stamp  into  contact  with  one 
side of the NEMS chip, the PDMS adhesion front moves along the chip, demonstrating the appropriate 
contact  of  the  PDMS  stamp  with  the  chip.  In  a  second  step,  a  pressure  is  applied  onto  the  stamp  to 
collapse the bottom of the patterned trenches onto the nanocantilever for biofunctionalization purpose. 

