
On geometry-dependent vortex stability and topological

spin excitations on curved surfaces with cylindrical

symmetry

V. L. Carvalho-Santosa, F. A. Apoloniob, N. M. Oliveira-Netoc

aInstituto Federal de Educa¸cao, Ciencia e Tecnologia Baiano - Senhor do Bonfim

48970-000 Senhor do Bonfim, Bahia, Brazil

bDepartamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal de Vi¸cosa

36570-000 Vi¸cosa, Minas Gerais, Brazil

cDepartamento de Qu´ımica e Exatas, Universidade Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia

45206-190, Jequi´e, Bahia, Brazil.

Abstract

We study the Heisenberg Model on cylindrically symmetric curved surfaces.
Two kinds of excitations are considered. The first is given by the isotropic
regime, yielding the sine-Gordon equation and π-solitons are predicted. The
second one is given by the XY model, leading to a vortex turning around
the surface. Helical states are also considered, however, topological argu-
ments can not be used to ensure its stability. The energy and the anisotropy
parameter which stabilizes the vortex state are explicitly calculated for two
surfaces: catenoid and hyperboloid. The results show that the anisotropy
and the vortex energy depends on the underlying geometry.

Keywords: Classical spin models, Solitons, Vortices, Curvature, Heisenberg
Model
2000 MSC: 81T40, 81T45, 81T20, 70S05

1. Introduction

Geometrical and topological concepts and tools are important in many
branches of natural sciences, particularly, in Physics. For instance, the idea
of symmetry, which is intimately associated with geometry, is a keystone for

URL: vagson.santos@bonfim.ifbaiano.edu.br (V. L. Carvalho-Santos)

Preprint submitted to Physics Letters A

September 26, 2018

studying a number of fundamental properties of several physical systems, e.g.,
the Noether theorem asserts that there is a conserved quantity to each con-
tinuous symmetry of the associated action. Topology, in turn, is crucial for
classifying and for giving stability to certain excitations, such as solitons, ex-
tending objects having finite energy, and vortices, presenting a non-vanishing
vorticity around a given singular point or a topological obstruction. In ad-
dition, the observed vortex-pair dissociation is the mechanism behind the
topological phase transition [1]. Vortices and solitons have been observed
in a number of systems, such as superconductors, superfluids, and magnetic
materials [2, 3].

Curvature effects play an important role in the characteristics of these
topological structures. For instance, Vitelli et al have shown that in-plane
vortices interact not only with each other, but also with the curvature of the
substrate [4]. Curvature is also an important factor in the magnetic systems
behaviour, in which the interaction of the out-of-plane component of mag-
netic vortices with curved defects must cause a chiral symmetry breaking
in its gyrotropic motion due the thin-film roughness [5, 6]. Furthermore,
the easy-surface Heisenberg model in magnetic spherical shells predicts a
coupling between the localized out-of-surface component of the vortex with
its non-localized in-surface structure, associated with the curvature of the
underlying geometry [7] and still, the smooth and variable curvature of fer-
romagnetic nanotorus ensures the stability of the vortex for smaller radius
than their nanoring counterparts [8].

In the case of two-dimensional systems, vortices and solitons can appear
like solutions of the continuous Heisenberg Model, which has been used to
analyse the dynamic and static properties of vortices, showing that the en-
ergy of these excitations is closely linked to the geometrical properties of the
surface [9]−[14]. It has also been shown that, for simply-connected surfaces,
the vortex energy presents a divergence, which can be controlled by the in-
sertion of a cutoff in the region where the continuous limit of Heisenberg
Hamiltonian has not validity. In the case of magnetic systems, this diver-
gence must be controlled by the development of an out-of-plane component
in the vortex core region. Soliton-like solution has also been considered in
the above cited works and it has been shown that its characteristic length
depends on the length scale of the surface. For finite surfaces, fractional/half-
soliton solutions have been found [11, 15]. Furthermore, the interaction of an
external magnetic field with Heisenberg spins on a cylindrical surface yields
a 2π soliton-like solution, inducing a deformation at the sector where the

2

spins are pointing in the opposite direction to the magnetic field [16]. A 2π
soliton has also been predicted to appear on curved surfaces with cylindrical
symmetry, provided the magnetic field is coupled with the curvature of the
substrate [17, 18].

In this paper, we study the anisotropic Heisenberg Model on curved sur-
faces with cylindrical symmetry. We are interested in studying a class of
topological spin textures on these manifolds in such way that both, soliton
and vortex-like solutions are considered. Solitons are predicted to appear on
an infinite cylindrically symmetric surface, if the isotropic case is taken into
account. In our assumptions, the soliton characteristic length is rescheduled
to one and does not depend on the characteristic length scale of the surface.
For finite surfaces, fractional solitons, which have not topological stability,
are found.

Our analysis includes the study of the XY model and vortex-like solu-
tions are considered. It is shown that, for non-simply connected manifolds,
the obstruction of the surface ensures the vortex topological stability due the
removal of spurious divergences appearing in the core region. The XY model
can also yield a helical-like state, however topological arguments must not be
used to ensure the stability of this spin configuration. The energies of these
spin textures are calculated and we we get that it depends on the surface cur-
vature. Furthermore, we calculate the critical anisotropy parameter for which
the vortex appears as the ground state and we show that it is also associated
to the geometrical properties of the surface. We calculate explicitly the vor-
tex energy and the critical anisotropy parameter for two different geometries:
the catenoid and hyperboloid, which are negatively curved and non-simply
connected manifolds. The choice for studying these surfaces is associated
with the fact that both can be realized in fluid interfaces provided with an
orientational ordered phase as a consequence of the interplay between surface
tension and orientational elasticity [19]. Furthermore, catenoid is the shape
minimizing the curvature elastic energy, appearing in phospholipid vesicles
of high topology [20] and the symmetry of these geometries allows us to com-
pare our results to these found for the cylindrical case, largely explored in
nanomagnetism researches.

To proceed with our analysis, this work is organized as follows: in Section
2 we present the continuous anisotropic Heisenberg Model on rotationally
symmetric surfaces. The results and discussions for the isotropic Heisenberg
Hamiltonian and the XY model are also considered in this section. Section
3 brings the discussions about the model on the catenoid and hyperboloid

3

surfaces and compare our results with that obtained for the surface of a
cylinder. Finally, in the Section 4, we present our conclusions and prospects
for future works.

2. Continuum Heisenberg Model on Curved Surfaces

The anisotropic exchange Heisenberg model, for nearest neighbour inter-
acting spins on a two-dimensional lattice, is given by the Hamiltonian below:

Hlatt = −J ′Xhi,ji

[mx

i mx

j + my

i my

j + (1 + λ)mz

i mz
j ],

(1)

i , mz

i , my

where J ′ denotes the coupling between neighbouring spins, and according
to J ′ < 0 or J ′ > 0, the Hamiltonian describes a ferro or antiferromagnetic
system, respectively. ~mi = (mx
i ) is the spin operator at site i and
the parameter λ accounts for the anisotropy interaction amongst spins: for
λ > 0, spins tend to align along the internal Z axis (easy-axis regime); for
λ = 0, one gets the isotropic case; for −1 < λ < 0, we have the easy-plane
regime, while the λ = −1 case yields to the so-called XY model, which has
If we focus on a two-component
been considered on curved surfaces [21].
spin, imposing mz ≡ 0, so that ~mP RM = (mx, my), we get the planar rotator
model (PRM).
In the continuum approach of spatial and spin variables, valid at suffi-
ciently large wavelength and low temperature, the model given by Eq. (1)
may be written as follows (J ≡ J ′/2):
1

(1 + λm2

z)dη1dη2

H = −

4J

a2 ZZ
gijhab(1 + δa3λ)(cid:18)∂ma

pg

+ JZZ

2

3

Xi,j=1

Xa,b=1

∂ηi (cid:19)(cid:18) ∂mb

∂ηj (cid:19)pgdη1dη2,

(2)

where a is the network spacing, the surface has curvilinear coordinates η1

and η2, pg = pdet[gij], gij and hab are the surface and spin space
metrics, respectively (as usual, gijgjk = δi
k). Now, ~m = (mx, my, mz) ≡
(sin Θ cos Φ, sin Θ sin Φ, cos Θ) is the classical spin vector field valued on an
unity sphere (internal space), so that Θ = Θ(η1, η2) and Φ = Φ(η1, η2). With
this, the Cartesian parametrization for ~m yields to hab = δab. Note that
the first term in the first integral in the Hamiltonian (2) is the ground state

4

energy and we will renormalize it to be zero. It can also be noted that, if
λ decreases from 0 to −1, the term depending on m2
z increases the energy if
mz 6= 0, thus, the smallest energy associated to the anisotropic Heisenberg
Hamiltonian will occur for mz = 0. The Hamiltonian (2) may be also viewed
as the anisotropic non-linear σ model (NLσM), which lies on an arbitrary
two-dimensional geometry. Thus, besides ordinary spins, the above model
can be used to describe another condensed matter systems, e.g., a superfluid
helium film, thin superconducting films [4, 22], a nematic liquid crystal con-
fined on curved surfaces [23] or a spin lader, which consists in two or more
coupled spin chains [24].

Our interest is to study the above model on curved surfaces with cylindri-
cal symmetry, which, in cylindrical coordinate system, can be parametrized
by r = (ρ(z), φ, z), where ρ(z) ≡ ρ is the radius of the surface at height
z, and φ accounts for the azimuthal angle. In this case, we have that the
covariant metric elements are given by:

gφφ =

1
gφφ = ρ2

and

gzz =

1
gzz = 1 + ρ ′ 2,

(3)

where ρ ′ = dρ/dz. In this case, the Hamiltonian (2) can be rewritten as:

gzz (cid:2)f (Θ)(∂zΘ)2 + sin2 Θ(∂zΦ)2(cid:3)

H = JZZ nr gφφ
gφφ (cid:2)f (Θ)(∂φΘ)2 + sin2 Θ(∂φΦ)2(cid:3) −s gzz

gφφ

+r gzz

4λ cos2 Θ

a2

odzdφ,

(4)

where f (Θ) = 1 + λ sin2 Θ.

The Euler-Lagrange equations derived from the Hamiltonian (4) are eval-

uated to give:

2f (Θ)(∂2

ζ Θ + ∂2

φΘ) = sin 2Θn (∂ζΦ)2 + (∂φΦ)2

− λ(cid:2)(∂ζ Θ)2 + (∂φΘ)2(cid:3) +

and

4λ

a2s gzz
gφφo

ζ Φ + ∂2

sin2 Θ(cid:0)∂2

φΦ(cid:1) + sin 2Θ (∂ζ Θ∂ζΦ + ∂φΘ∂φΦ) = 0,

where dζ =pgzz/gφφdz.

5

(5)

(6)

At this point, one can note that the above equations resemble, in form,
their counterparts for the planar, cylindrical [13], spherical [12], pseudospher-
ical [11] and toroidal [9] surfaces. Indeed, whenever ζ is identified with

s

dθ,

R + s sin θ
1

sinh τ

ζpsph =Z

dτ,

(7)

ζtor =Z

ρ

ζcyl =Z 1
ζsph =Z

dρ,

1

dθ,

S sin θ

the Eqs. (5) and (6) recover their cylindrical, toroidal, spherical or pseu-
dospherical analogs, respectively. Here, θ is the polar angle in spherical
coordinates system. In the toroidal surface, it plays a similar role, however
θ accounts for the polar angle between the spin vector and a line parallel to
the z-axis, crossing the center of the torus arm. R and s are the rotating
and axial radius of the torus, S is the sphere radius and sinh τ accounts for
the distance measured along pseudospherical geodesic, say, a hyperbole.
As expected, the anisotropic Heisenberg model is described by nonlin-
ear differential equations and suitable nontrivial solutions can be obtained
provided some conditions are imposed. Thus, special solutions for the most
general Eq. (5) will be explicitly obtained by solving it for particular values
of λ. Initially, we will consider the isotropic case, which is given by λ = 0.
After, we will take λ = −1 to study the XY model.
2.1. Isotropic regime and soliton-like solutions

The simplest way to seek for possible soliton-like solutions associated with
the present model on a generic surface is by considering the isotropic regime,
λ = 0, and writing down the Hamiltonian (4) and its associated equations (5)
and (6) in a more suitable form. The assumption of cylindrical symmetry,
Θ(ζ, φ) ≡ Θ(ζ) and Φ(ζ, φ) ≡ Φ(φ), will allow us to get the sine-Gordon
equation in a simpler way. In this case, Eq. (4) is written as:

HIsot =Z π

−π

dφZ ζ2

ζ1 (cid:2)(∂ζ Θ)2 + sin2 Θ (∂φΦ)2(cid:3) dζ

and the Eq. (6) is simplified to:

sin2 Θ∂2

φΦ = 0 ⇒ Φ = Qφ + φ0,

(8)

(9)

where Q ∈ Z and φ0 is a constant of integration. Other possible solutions for
the Eq. (9) are Θ = 0 and Θ = π, which are the two vacua of the isotropic

6

Heisenberg model. By taking Q = 1 in the solution given by the Eq. (9), we
can rewrite the Eq. (5) as:

2∂2

ζ Θ = sin 2Θ,

(10)

which consists in the sine-Gordon equation. By imposing the boundary con-
ditions Θ(−∞) = 0 and Θ(∞) = π, the solution for this equation is a
topological soliton excitation, which appears as a continuous transition con-
necting the two neighbouring minima [25]:

Θ(ζ) = 2 arctan(cid:0)eζ(cid:1) .

(11)

It is important to note that, usually, the soliton presents a characteristic
length scale (CLS) that depends on the characteristic length of the underlying
manifold, which, in general, appears in front of the sin(2Θ) term in Eq.
(10). However this characteristic length is given by gφφ/gzz, which, with our
assumptions, is embedded in the ζ parameter. Thus, the soliton would have
its CLS rescheduled to one, e.g., if we take the cylinder case, the CLS of the
soliton is equal to the radius ρ0 of the cylinder, however, when working on an
infinite cylinder, the change of variable z → z/ρ0 eliminates any dependence
on ρ0 [13].
From the calculation of the energy associated to the Eq. (11), we obtain:

Es = 2πJZ ζ2

ζ1 (cid:2)(∂ζΘ)2 + sin2 Θ(cid:3) dζ = −

8πJ

e2ζ + 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

which is in agreement with the saturated Bogomolnyi inequality [26] (Es ≥
8πJ), once, if we evaluate the solitonic charge,

ζ2

ζ1

,

(12)

Q =

1

4πZ sin ΘdΘdΦ,

(13)

(11), we exactly obtain Q = −1/(e2ζ + 1). At the interval
in the Eq.
ζ = (−∞,∞), the soliton agrees with its counterpart, which lies in an in-
finite cylinder and represents a complete mapping from the spin sphere to
the target manifold, a π soliton, so corresponding to the first homotopy class
of the second homotopy group of the mapping of the spin sphere. However,
when we consider finite surfaces, such a mapping is incomplete and a frac-
tional soliton solution appears, such that no homotopy arguments can be

7

Figure 1: [Color online] From left to right, the three first figures show the vortex pattern
with winding number Q = 1 on the surfaces of the cylinder, hyperboloid and catenoid. The
last figure represents a helical-like state on the catenoid. In the three first cases, the spins
turn around the surface in a closed way. In spite of the cylinder and catenoid have different
shape, the characteristic length associated to these are equal, then they present the same
value for the vortex energy. On the other hand, the catenoid and hyperboloid surfaces have
similar shapes, but they have different characteristic length and still, the mean curvature
of the catenoid is null, while the mean curvature of the hyperboloid is nonzero. This
leads to different values for the vortex energy on these surfaces. The helical-like state can
present its energy equal to the vortex state, provided we have Φ(ζ) = Φ(−ζ).

used for classifying solution (11) as a topological excitation. Indeed, in this
case, we must take into account the topology of the geometrical support. In
other words, for non-simply connected surfaces, the soliton acquires a finite
characteristic length, which prevents its collapse and, consequently, its size
does not vanish. Similar scenarios are provided by the annulus, the truncated
cone [14], the punctured pseudosphere [11] and torus [9].

Periodic soliton solutions can also be obtained for these rotationally sym-
metric surfaces [13, 27] and the differences among the particle-like excitations
in these and other geometries are associated to their characteristic length
scales [27].

Now, we may wonder whether another solitonic solution, with Θ(ζ, φ) ≡
Θ(φ) and Φ(ζ, φ) = Φ(ζ), should not also appear in this framework.
In
fact, once ζ is not, in general, a periodic parameter, sin Φ would be peri-
odic only for ζ = 2πm (with m ≥ 1 integer) and consequently, the spin
sphere mapping should be possible only for this particular case. Besides, the
geometry-imposed boundary conditions must lead to a periodic solution for
Θ, that is, Θ(0) = Θ(2π), and solitonic excitations must not occur this way.

8

2.2. XY model

Geometrically, a vortex with winding number Q may be viewed as a set
of spins rotating in a closed circuit around a core, whose center is a singular
point, or a topological obstruction, which makes it impossible to change the
configuration to a perfectly aligned state without tampering with spins at
an arbitrary distance from the core. Thus, once a vortex-like configuration
cannot be continuously deformed to the ground state, it acquires the status
of a topologically stable excitation.

When we model a vortex as a continuum of spins, we intend to describe
only its outer region; once inside the core, the analytical treatment is ex-
pected to give only an estimate of its energy, shedding no light about its
real structure and spins arrangement, which require numeric or simulation
techniques. However, as we shall see in the two particular examples treated
here, non-simply connected topologies lead to a natural cutoff for the vortex,
which is provided by the surface hole and the solution presents no core. On
the other hand, in the case of a connected surface, a singular core takes place,
appearing at the surface's self-intercepting points.

It is easy to note that a vortex solution could be obtained from the
isotropic Heisenberg Hamiltonian, however, we have chosen to work with
the XY model, by adopting λ = −1 in the adopted model. This choice is
justified from the fact that it inserts constraints in the solutions for Θ, which
stays confined to the xy-plane. In this case, assuming cylindrical symmetry,
the Eqs. (5) and (6) are simplified to:

2 cos2 Θ∂2

ζ Θ = sin 2Θ"(∂φΦ)2 + (∂ζΘ)2 −

4

gφφ #
a2s gzz

and

φΦ = 0,
and the Hamiltonian (4) can be rewritten as:

sin2 Θ∂2

HXY = JZZ (cid:2)(1 − sin2 Θ)(∂ζΘ)2 + sin2 Θ(∂φΦ)2(cid:3) dζdφ

+

(14)

(15)

(16)

As previously noted, the simplest solution for the equations (14) and (15)
must be given by Θ = 0 or Θ = π. However, the last term in Hamiltonian

4J

a2 ZZ gzz cos2 Θdζdφ.

9

(16) gives a positive contribution for the energy, and it is minimized when
Θ = π/2, which is also a possible solution for (14). Thus, in order to diminish
the energy, the Θ function must be confined to the xy-plane and, in this case,
the Eq. (15) yields:

(17)
which represents a vortex with winding number Q. The winding number
(vorticity) is formally defined, in the continuum limit, as:

Φ = Qφ + φ0,

Q ∈ Z,

Q =

1

2π IC

(~∇Φ) · d~l,

(18)

where the integration is evaluated along a closed path C around the surface.
The vortex pattern with Q = 1 for the surfaces of catenoid, hyperboloid, and
cylinder can be viewed in the Fig. 1. From Eq. (16), one can see that the
vortex energy increases with Q2, thus, vortices with Q > 1 are physically
unstable, despite they have topological stability. Thus, we will analyse only
the case Q = 1.
mined from Eq. (16), and it is evaluated to give:

The vortex energy, for an cylindrically symmetric surface, can be deter-

ζ

ζ

Evortex = 2πJζ(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)

,

2

1

(19)

where one can note that the vortex energy depends on the ζ parameter,
which is closely related to the curvature of the surface and to the radius of
the surface at height z. For example, the torus, sphere and pseudosphere
present this parameter given by ζtor, ζsph and ζpsph, given in the set of Eqs.
(7).

Now, we can look for the possibility of the existence of helical-like states
on the considered surfaces, which can be obtained by taking Φ(ζ, φ) ≡ Φ(ζ).
In this case, the Hamiltonian (4) yields:

HXY2 = JZZ (cid:2)(1 − sin2 Θ)(∂ζΘ)2 + sin2 Θ(∂ζΦ)2(cid:3) dζdφ

+

4J

a2 ZZ gzz cos2 Θdζdφ,

and the derived Euler-Lagrange equations are:

2 cos2 Θ∂2

ζ Θ = sin 2Θ(cid:20)(∂ζΦ)2 + (∂ζΘ)2 −

4gzz

a2 (cid:21) .

10

(20)

(21)

Using the same arguments of the previous analysis, it is easy to note that the
simplest solution minimizing the energy is given by Θ = π/2. In this way,
the Eq. (6) is simplified to:

∂2
ζ Φ = 0 → Φ(ζ) = qζ + ζ0,

(22)

where one can note that this solution looks like that given in Eq.
(17).
However, unlike the vortex case, q must not be an integer number, once
ζ is not, in general, periodic. Thus, we have not a closed path along the
surface to define the topological charge.
In order to obtain a helical-like
state rotating by 2π along the surface, we can assume the boundary condition
Φ(ζ) = Φ(−ζ). Thus, q would be an integer and the spin vector field form a
closed structure around the xy-plane of the internal space when the surface
is mapped from −z to z (See Fig. 1). The energy of this spin configuration,
for q = 1, is given by:
(23)

EHel = 2πJζ,

which is the same solution found for the vortex state.
It is important to
note that the helical-like state has not topological stability, once q must
not be considered as a topological charge. The coincidence in the energy
values of the vortex and helical-like states appears due the imposed boundary
conditions for Φ(ζ). Another important fact is that, if we were considering
the magnetostatic energy term in our model, this configuration would have
magnetic energy greater than that of the vortex state due the appearing of
surface magnetic charges, σ = m · n, and it would not be stable.
Finally, once the Eq. (15) gives us two possible solutions to Φ(φ), we
can look for the critical value for the anisotropy parameter, λc, such that for
λ < λc one has solution (17) and for λ > λc the solution Θ = 0 appears.
Here, λc will be determined by calculating the energy for these different spin
configurations and comparing them. The stable state will be that one which
minimizes the energy. With this assumptions, it is easy to note that

λ′
c = −ζ/ξ,
c = 4λc/a2. Thus, it can be noted that,
as well as the vortex energy, λc also depends on the surface's geometrical
properties and, consequently, different surfaces must present different values
for λc. In the case of the cylinder it is easily shown that λ′

where ξ = R pgzz/gφφdz and λ′

(24)

In order to present some examples showing the relation among curvature,
vortex energy and critical anisotropy parameter, we will study two particular

c = −1.

11

surfaces: the catenoid and the hyperboloid, which are non-simply connected
and negatively curved surfaces, having cylindrical symmetry.

3. Two particular cases

3.1. Catenoid

The first surface to be considered is the catenoid, which is a nonplanar
minimal surface. The catenoid has mean curvature everywhere zero and has
the fascinating property that it can be deformed into a helicoid in such a
way that every surface along the way is a minimal surface, which is locally
isometric to the helicoid. This surface appears in many physical systems, e.g.,
a soap film formed between two coaxial rings takes on this shape [28] and in
membrane fissions, where the characteristic of the neck shape is determined
by the relationship between the neck radius and the monolayer thickness [29].
In order to describe the adopted model in the geometry of the catenoid,

we have parametrized this surface as follows:

x = ρ0 cosh(cid:18) z

ρ0(cid:19) cos φ,

y = ρ0 cosh(cid:18) z

ρ0(cid:19) sin φ,

(25)

where φ ∈ [0, 2π], z ∈ (−∞,∞) and ρ0 is the radius of the circle in the
z = 0 plane. This parametrization yields the negative Gaussian curvature
0sech4(z/ρ0) and it allows us to get the characteristic length
Gcat = −1/ρ2
scales of the catenoid, which are given by:

ζcat =Z h

−h

1
ρ0

dz =

2h
ρ0

,

and

ξcat = 2 coth

h
ρ0

,

(26)

where 2h is the height of the catenoid. From the Eq. (26), one can see that
the critical value for the anisotropy parameter, in the catenoid case, depends
on h, and it is given by:

λ′ cat

c = −

h
ρ0

ρ0(cid:19) .
coth(cid:18) h

(27)

It can be noted that, unlike the cylinder case, the critical anisotropy
parameter that stabilizes the vortex configuration depends on the relation
between height and central radius (CR) of the catenoid, represented by ρ0.
For h → 0, we get λ′ cat
c → −1 and, for large values of h/ρ0, it can be noted

12

c

that λ′ cat
decreases linearly with the height. This behaviour is expected,
once the vortex energy, on this surface, is a linear function of h (See Eq.
(33)). The Fig. 2 show the behaviour λ′
c with when we varies the height
and CR of the catenoid surface. One can note that λ′ cat
c → −1 for large ρ0
values, as expected, once, when ρ0 ≫ h, the catenoid surface looks like a
cylinder.

3.2. Hyperboloid

The hyperboloid is a quadratic surface that may be one- or two-sheeted.
The one-sheeted hyperboloid is a surface of revolution obtained by rotating
a hyperbola about the perpendicular bisector to the line between the foci,
that is, about the z axis, while the two-sheeted hyperboloid is a surface of
revolution obtained by rotating a hyperbola about the line joining the foci.
When oriented along the z-axis, the one-sheeted circular hyperboloid with

skirt radius ρ has its parametrization given by:

x = ρp1 + η2 cos φ,

y = ρp1 + η2 sin φ

and

z = bη.

(28)

This parametrization yields a shape similar to the catenoid, however the
last one has mean curvature null everywhere, while that one of the hyper-
boloid is given by [30]:

Khyp =

b2[ρ2(η2 − 1) + b2(1 + η2)]
2ρ[ρ2 + b2(1 + η2)](3/2)

,

and the Gaussian curvature is:

Ghyp = −

b2

b2 + (b2 + ρ2)η2 .

(29)

(30)

Thus, unlike the catenoid, the hyperboloid is not a minimal surface. Fur-
thermore, there are substantial differences in their (x, y) coordinates away
from the plane z = 0, as well as in their geometrical properties.

The general parametrization given in Eq. (28) leads to a hard integral
to be calculated, so that, when necessary, ζhyp and ξhyp will be computed
numerically. However, a particular and interesting kind of hyperboloid, which
leads to solvable integrals to the characteristic length parameters, is described
by the polar hyperbolic coordinate system (biharmonic coordinates), which
can be obtained for taking b = ρ in the Eq. (28). This particular coordinate

13

0

-10

-20

Λ

-30

-40

0

Catenoid

Polar Hyperboloid

Hyperboloid b=0.5

Hyperboloid b=1

Hyperboloid b=2

Hyperboloid b=3

2

4

6

Ρ

8

10

Figure 2: [Color online] The top left figure show the critical value for the anisotropy pa-
rameter, in function of height and CR for the catenoid, polar hyperboloid and hyperboloid
with b = 1. Note that the catenoid and polar hyperboloid present λ′
c strongly depending
on ρ0. The top right figure show λ′
c for the hyperboloid with b = 0.5, b = 2 and b = 3. In
the bottom figure, we have fixed the height z = 4 and CR varies from 0 to 10. One can see
that critical anisotropy parameter is highly depending on the geometrical properties of the
surface. Furthermore, it increases with the radius, in the case of the catenoid, it decreases
for the hyperboloidal surfaces. If we consider different heights, there was no qualitative
changes in the λ′

c behaviour.

14

system was recently used to develop the pseudospherical functions on an
one-sheeted polar hyperboloid [31]. These functions may be important if
we consider problems where the solution of the Laplace equation in systems
with hyperbolic symmetry is demanded. For instance, they could be used to
calculate the magnetostatic energy in magnets with hyperbolic shape or still,
to calculate the magnetic field inside solenoids with this geometry, when it is
traversed by an electric current and/or still, to determinate the electric field
generated by a charged polar hyperbolic shell.

By using the parametric equations (28), the vortex energy to the polar

hyperboloid is given by the Eq. (19) with ζ given by:

ζphyp =Z χ(η)dη = √2arcsinh(√2η) +

1
4

1 + 3η2 + 2ηp1 + 2η2! + κ2,
ln  1 + 3η2 − 2ηp1 + 2η2

(31)

where

χ(η) = p1 + 2η2

1 + η2

.

(32)

and κ2 is a constant of integration.

Finally, we must calculate the critical anisotropy parameter of this sur-
face. In order to do this, we have gotten ξhyp numerically. The results of the
critical anisotropy parameter for the polar hyperboloid, and the hyperboloid
with b = 0.5, b = 1, b = 2 and b = 3 are summarized in the Fig. 2. As
well as the catenoid, λ′ hyp
depends on the height and radius of the surface.
However, the anisotropy parameter must decreases in order to give stability
to the vortex state. Note that for small CR, λ′ hyp
 has its smallest value
for b = 0.5, when compared to the cases where b = 1, b = 2 or b = 3. How-
ever, when we increases the ρ0 value, this situation is reversed. Finally, the
analysis of the Fig. 2 show that λ′ hyp

c → −1 only for h → 0 and ρ0 → 0.
3.3. Comparison between the vortex energy on a catenoid and hyperboloid

c

c

From the Eq. (19) and ζcat, we get the energy of a vortex on a catenoid

surface, which can be explicitly written as:

Ecat

vortex =

4πJh

ρ0

,

(33)

which is the same energy obtained for a vortex on the surface of a cylinder
with height 2h and radius ρ0. This is an interesting result, since the area of

15

the catenoid is greater than that of the cylinder. This fact can be explained
because these surfaces present the same characteristic length 1/ρ0, which can
be noted by the development of the Hamiltonian (4) for the cylinder surface.
Furthermore, from the analysis of the Fig. 1, it can be noted that, in the z = 0
plane, the neighbour spins on the catenoid must have the angle equal to that
of the spins on the cylinder, however, when z 6= 0, the neighbour spins that
turning around the catenoid surface have a lower deviation one to another,
when compared with that of the cylinder, diminishing the exchange energy
(given by the Heisenberg model) in this plane, which compensates the largest
area. To say this on another way, if the circle situated in the plane z = h, for
each surface, is divided in points with a distance ∆x one to another, we have
that the circle on the cylinder is divided in n′ = 2πρ0/∆x points, while the
circle on the catenoid is divided in n = 2πρ0 cosh(h/ρ0)/∆x. In this way, we
have that n = n′ cosh(h/ρ0). On the other hand, the obtained circumferences
can be divided in arcs of angles θ = 2π/n and θ′ = 2π/n′ for the catenoid
and cylinder, respectively. It is immediate to note that θ = θ′/ cosh(h/ρ0).
A closed spin texture on these circles can be given by associating one spin for
each point, in such way that the angle between two neighbour spins for the
catenoid (cylinder) is θ (θ′). The energy for these vortex-like structure in the

circle on the catenoid is Ecat = Pi,j cos θij = n cos θ, where the subscripts i

and j indicate neighbour spins. The energy for the circle on the cylinder is
Ecyl = n′ cos θ′. Finally, Ecat and Ecyl are related by:

Ecat =

n cos 2π
n
n′ cos 2π
n′

Ecyl.

(34)

For n ≫ 1, we have that Ecat = Ecyl cosh(h/ρ0). Now, the cylinder and
catenoid heights can be divided in m′ and m circles, respectively. The total
energy of the vortex on the surfaces are given by:

Etcyl = m′Ecyl

and

Etcat = mEcat = mEcyl cosh

Since m = m′ ρ0

h sinh h
ρ0

, we obtain:

Etcat =(cid:18) ρ0

2h

sinh

2h

ρ0(cid:19) Etcyl.

h
ρ0

.

(35)

(36)

ρ0 ≪ 1 → sinh 2h

If 2h
, and finally Etcat = Etcyl, as we wanted to show.
This discrete analysis is not valid for large 2h/ρ0 values, once in this limit, the

ρ0 ≈ 2h

ρ0

16

.






approximation of the surfaces by points does not represent the continuum
approach to the Heisenberg Hamiltonian and the gotten results must not
agree with that found in the Eq. (33).

Ephyp

In the case of the hyperboloid, analytical calculations will be done only
for the biharmonic coordinates. In this case, in order to obtain and analyse
the vortex energy on a hyperboloid with height 2h, we will take the limits
ζ1 = −h/ρ0 and ζ2 = h/ρ0 in the Hamiltonian (20). Thus, the vortex energy
is given by:
ρ0r1 + 2(cid:16) h
ρ0(cid:17)2
− 2 h
ρ0r1 + 2(cid:16) h
ρ0(cid:17)2
+ 2 h

vortex = 4πJ
√2arcsinh(cid:18)√2


(37)
Despite of the polar hyperbolic coordinates give us an analytical solution
to the vortex energy, it also will be interesting to calculate it numerically for
the most general hyperboloid (b 6= ρ0) and analyse its behaviour in function
of the radius ρ0. In this case, ζhyp =R χ′(η)dη, where

ρ0(cid:17)2
1 + 3(cid:16) h
ρ0(cid:17)2
1 + 3(cid:16) h

ln


h

ρ0(cid:19) +

1
4

χ′(η) = pb2(1 + η2) + ρ2

ρ0(1 + η2)

0η2

.

(38)

The numerical integration was done for using the Simpsons rule with a For-
tran code, and the results can be viewed in Fig. 3.

To continue our analysis, it will be useful to define the upper radius (UR),
which is the value of the radius of the surfaces in the plane z = ±h. The
cylinder, the catenoid and the hyperboloid have their CR and UR related by:

Rcyl

Upper = ρ,

Rcat

ρ(cid:19)
Upper = ρ cosh(cid:18) h

and

Upper = ρ√1 + h2,
Rhyp

(39)
where ρ represents the CR of the cylinder, catenoid and hyperboloid (b = 1),
respectively.

From the Fig. 3, one can note that, for small values of ρ, the vortex on a
hyperboloid has lower energy than that on a catenoid. However, when ρ in-
creases, this behaviour changes, and the energy of a vortex on the hyperboloid
becomes greater than that on the catenoid. The value of ρ for the transition
point in which the vortex energy on the hyperboloid and on the catenoid in-
tersect themselves depends on h, and varies from ρ ≈ 2 for h = 1.5 to ρ ≈ 4

17

h=1.5

Catenoid
Polar Hyperboloid
Hyperboloid
2π ln (1+h2)

15

20

5

10
r

h=5

Catenoid
Polar Hyperboloid
Hyperboloid
2π ln (1+h2)

y
g
r
e
n
E
 
x
e
t
r
o
V

20

15

10

5

0

0

40

30

20

10

y
g
r
e
n
E
x
e
t
r
o
V

 

0

0

5

10
r

15

20

25

20

15

10

y
g
r
e
n
E
 
x
e
t
r
o
V

5

0

0

50

40

y
g
r
e
n
E
x
e
t
r
o
V

 

30

20

10

0

0

h=2.5

Catenoid
Polar Hyperboloid
Hyperboloid
2π ln (1+h2)

15

20

5

10
r

h=10

Catenoid
Polar Hyperboloid
Hyperboloid
2π ln (1+h2)

5

10
r

15

20

Figure 3: [Color online] Energy of the vortex on the catenoid (black line) and the hyper-
boloid (red dashed line) surfaces. Here, we have done J = 1, b = 1 and ρ0 ≡ ρ is evaluated
in the interval from 0.01 to 20. Four values of h are considered: h = 1.5 (top left), h = 2.5
(top right), h = 5 (bottom left) and h = 10 (bottom right). One can see that, for small
values of CR (central radius), the energy of a vortex on the hyperboloid is lower than
that of the vortex on a catenoid. However, for large values of CR, the vortex energy on a
catenoid vanishes, while that one of the hyperboloid tends to 2π ln(1 + h2). The energy of
a vortex on the polar hyperboloid (magenta dots) is always lower than that on a catenoid
and, unlike the general hyperboloid (b 6= ρ), it vanishes when ρ → ∞.

18

for h = 10. This fact can be explained from the differences of the properties
of the geometries of the catenoid and hyperboloid when ρ → ∞ and the
height h is maintained constant. While the catenoid has its UR related with
the height by cosh(h/ρ), the UR of the hyperboloid increases with √1 + h2,
which implies that, for ρ ≫ h, we have Rcat
Upper → ∞.
Indeed, for ρ ≫ h, the catenoid surface looks like a cylinder, while the hyper-
boloid has the topology and geometry of a plane with a hole. The analysis
of the Fig. 3 shows also that ρ → ∞ when Ehyp
vortex → 2π ln(1 + h2). This is
the second time that an hyperbolic surface presents an asymptotic finite and
nonzero energy when the radius of the surface tends to infinity [11]. This
finite value to the vortex energy for ρ → ∞ can be explained because, unlike
the catenoid case, the characteristic length of the hyperboloid does not tend
to zero in this limit. In fact:

Upper → Rcyl

Upper and Rhyp

χ′(η)ρ→∞ =

η

1 + η2 =⇒ ζ ρ→∞

hyp = ln(1 + η2).

(40)

The case where b 6= 1 does not lead to qualitative changes on the vortex
energy behaviour on a hyperboloid. In this case, the curve that characterizes
the vortex energy is moved upwardly, however, as well as the b = 1 case, it
tends to 2π ln(1 + h2), which is associated to the fact that the b value does
not affect the asymptotic behaviour of ζhyp when ρ → ∞ (see Eq. (32)).
Finally, we will analyse the vortex energy on the polar hyperboloid sur-
face, which is given by the Eq. (37). From the Fig. 3, one can note that
this surface presents a vortex whose energy is always lower than that on the
catenoid. For small CR, the vortex energy calculated by using biharmonic
coordinates is approximately that one obtained for general hyperboloid, once
ρ ≈ b = 1. However, as well as the result found for the catenoid, we have
that Ephyp → 0 when ρ → ∞. This fact can be explained because in this
limit, the polar hyperboloid looks like a catenoid and its characteristic length
is given by:

It is important to note that a vortex, understood as a topological defect,
is a singularity in the order parameter. Then, at first sight, it could mean
that the obtained solutions, which are smooth spin textures, are not vortices.
However, despite we do not have analysed this case explicitly, when CR → 0,
for both surfaces, one get that the vortex energy diverges due a singularity
in the order parameter at the center of the surfaces, which is the necessary
condition to call these excitations of topological vortices. A way to control

χ′(η)ρ→∞ = 1 =⇒ ζ ρ→∞

phyp = z/ρ = ζcat.

(41)

19

this divergence would be to insert a cutoff of length ℓ0 at the center of the
surfaces, as well as it has been done for other geometries where this singu-
larity appeared [9, 11, 12]. However, unlike the spherical, pseudopherical or
toroidal cases, if we introduce this cutoff in the point where the surfaces of
the catenoid and hyperboloid self intersecting, these will be divided in two
half-surfaces and this case is outside the scope of this work.

If we consider the case where the UR of the three surfaces are equal, it
is immediate to note that the catenoid has smaller energy than that of the
cylinder, since the vortex energy for both surfaces is proportional to 1/ρ.
However, there are not qualitative changes when we study the hyperboloid
case. Here, as well as the previous analysis, the vortex energy on the three
surfaces diminishes with the increasing of UR, tending to zero when r → ∞
(cylinder, catenoid and polar hyperboloid).
In conclusion, the lowest value found for the vortex energy, for any CR,
occurs for the polar hyperboloid, which can indicate, at first sight, that
among the geometries considered here, a "hyperboloidal nanoshell" could
support a vortex-like magnetization with more stability than their cylindrical
counterparts. However, to ensure this statement, one must calculate the
magnetostatic energy for other possible magnetization states and consider
the volume of the magnet.

Once miniaturization is an important issue in nanotechnology, the ob-
tained results may guide future researches on the stability of vortices in circu-
lar nanomagnets. About this theme, it has been shown that, due the out-of-
plane component, the vortex energy in circular nanodots is greater than that
obtained for nanorings with same dimensions, because they do not present
the out-of-plane component in the vortex core [32]. In this way, nanorings
can support vortex as magnetization ground state for smaller radius than
that of nanodots. Furthermore, it has been shown that the smooth curva-
ture of a toroidal device must improve the vortex stability, when compared
with cylindrical nanorings [8]. Thus, it may be possible that, by introduc-
ing curvature in the nanorings fabrication in order to obtain "hyperboloidal
nanorings", the vortex gets more stability, and one could fabricate smaller
nanomagnets with a vortex as the ground state.

4. Conclusions and Prospects

We have studied the anisotropic Heisenberg model on curved surfaces
with cylindrical symmetry in order to obtain a class of topological spin ex-

20

citations. By taking λ = 0, soliton-like solution has been gotten and it have
been shown that they have energy obeying the Bogomolnyi's inequality. Frac-
tional solitons, which has not topological stability, have also been predicted
to appear if we consider finite surfaces. By taking λ = −1, one obtain the XY
model, whose simplest solution is a vortex with winding number Q = 1. The
energy and stability associated to vortices is closely linked to the geometric
properties of the surface. Furthermore, we have gotten the anisotropy pa-
rameter, λc, for which the vortex appears as the groundstate, in comparison
with the state in which the spins point in the z-axis direction. It has been
shown that λc is also related to the geometry of the substrate and it must be
variable for surfaces with non-constant Gaussian curvature. In addition, we
have also studied the possibility of the appearing of helical-like states on the
considered surfaces. The energy of these states have been calculated and, for
periodic boundary conditions, the same energy predict for the vortices has
been obtained for this spin configuration, however, helical states does not
present a topological charge and homotopy arguments can not be used to
ensure its stability.

In order to exemplify our results, two surfaces were explicitly analysed:
the catenoid and the hyperboloid, which are non-simply connected mani-
folds having negative and variable Gaussian curvature. For each surface, the
vortex energy has been compared with that presented for a vortex on the
cylinder, which is a geometry that have received large attention in nano-
magnetism researches.
It has been noted that, for small CR, the general
hyperboloid (b 6= ρ) presents a vortex energy lower than that presented by
the vortex on a cylinder and on a catenoid, however, for ρ → ∞, unlike the
other studied geometries, the vortex energy on a hyperboloid does not vanish.
Furthermore, the smallest value for the vortex energy is given by the polar
hyperboloid surface. Thus, it may be possible that, by introducing curvature
in the nanorings fabrication, in order to obtain "hyperboloidal nanorings",
vortices are more stable, and one could fabricate smaller nanomagnets with a
vortex as the magnetization groundstate. However, when we think in nano-
magnetism applications, this fact does not ensure that nanomagnets with
this geometry could support a vortex magnetization configuration with more
stability than cylindrical nanorings. To state that, one must consider the
volume of a hyperbolic nanoring (nanomagnet limited by two polar hyper-
boloids with internal and external radii given by ρ1 and ρ2, respectively) and
take into account the magnetostatic energy to calculate the magnetic energy
associated to other magnetization configurations. In this way, if miniaturiza-

21

tion of magnetic elements is demanded, the understanding of the curvature
influence on magnetic properties of nanostructures is very important, once it
may give a way to diminish the size of nanomagnets that present a vortex as
the magnetization ground state. In this paper, we have explicitly considered
only the vortex state on non-simply connected and negatively curved surfaces
by assuming that they satisfy the conditions in their dimensions ensuring this
configuration.

Unlike the cylinder surface, the anisotropy parameter presented by the
catenoid and hyperboloid, which ensure the vortex as the lower energy con-
figuration, varies with the height and radius of the surface. The results
show that the increasing in the catenoid radius produces a decreasing in the
modulus of the anisotropy parameter, which goes to 1 at the limit ρ → ∞,
reflecting the fact that, in this limit, the geometry of the catenoid is similar
to the cylinder one. The modulus of the anisotropy parameter on the hy-
perboloid presents a different behaviour, increasing with the surface's radius
and height.

Despite we have given attention to magnetic systems, the adopted model
may be relevant to study nonmagnetic systems like a superfluid helium film,
where Φ would be the phase of the superfluid order parameter [4], a super-
conducting film, where the field is identified with the phase of the collective
wave function [4] or nematic liquid crystals, where Φ would be the nematic
director [23].

The results obtained here also may be relevant in the magnetoelastic
membrane manipulation subject, once vortex configuration could be used
as a way for deforming the geometry of magnetoelastic surfaces to obtain a
particular shape. In this context, it would be an interesting task to study
the vortex energy behaviour on surfaces with positive Gaussian curvature and
include the surface tension term in the analysis of this problem. In addition,
it may be important to study the influence of an external magnetic field
on the energy calculations of magnetoelastic materials presenting a vortex
configuration.

Acknowledgements

We thank the Brazilian agencies CNPq, FAPEMIG and PROPES of the
IF Baiano, for financial support. We also thank E.S. Palitot, J.S. Santos,
J.M. Fonseca, W.A. Moura-Melo and A.R. Pereira for fruitful discussions.
Carvalho-Santos thanks G.H. Lima-Santos and P.G. Lima-Santos for their

22

patience and understanding.

References

[1] J.M. Kosterlitz and D.J. Thouless, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 6,

1181 (1973); V.L. Berezinskii, Sov. Phys. JETP 34, 610 (1972)

[2] S.B. Choe, Y. Acremann, A. Scholl, A. Bauer, A. Doran, J. Stohr and
H.A. Padmore, Science 304, 420 (2004); A. Wachowiak, J. Wiebe, M.
Bode, O. Pietzsch, M. Morgenstern and R. Wiesendanger, Science 298,
577 (2002)

[3] X.Z. Yu, Y. Onose, K. Kanazawa, J.H. Park, J.H. Han, Y. Matsui, N.
Nagaosa and Y. Tokura, Nature 465, 901 (2010); K.S. Lee, M.W. Yoo,
Y.S. Choi and S.K. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 147201 (2011)

[4] V. Vitelli and A.M. Turner, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 215301 (2004)

[5] A. Vansteenkiste, M. Weigand, M. Curcic, H. Stoll, G. Schutz and B.

Van Waeyenberge, New Journ. of Phys. 11, 063006 (2009)

[6] F.A. polonio, W.A. Moura-Melo, F.P. Crisafuli, A.R. Pereira and R.L.

Silva, J. Appl. Phys. 106, 084320 (2009)

[7] V.P. Kravchuk, D.D. Sheka, R. Streubel, D. Makarov, O.G. Schmidt

and Y. Gaididei, Phys. Rev. B 85, 144433 (2012)

[8] V.L. Carvalho-Santos, W.A. Moura-Melo and A.R. Pereira, J. Appl.

Phys. 108, 094310 (2010)

[9] V.L. Carvalho-Santos, A.R. Moura, W.A. Moura-Melo and A.R.

Pereira, Phys. Rev. B 77, 134450 (2008)

[10] J. Benoit and R. Dandoloff, Phys. Lett. A 248, 439 (1998); A. Saxena,

R. Dandoloff and T. Lookman, Physica A 261, 13 (1998)

[11] L.R.A. Belo, N.M. Oliveira-Neto, W.A. Moura-Melo, A.R. Pereira and

E. Ercolessi, Phys. Lett. A 365 463 (2007)

[12] G.S. Milagre and W.A. Moura-Melo, Phys. Lett. A 368, 155 (2007)

23

[13] S. Villain-Guillot, R. Dandoloff, A. Saxena and A.R. Bishop, Phys.
Rev. B 52, 6712 (1995); L.A.N. de Paula, Bras. Journ. of Phys. 39,
711 (2009)

[14] W.A. Freitas, W.A. Moura-Melo and A.R. Pereira, Phys. Lett. A 336,

412 (2005)

[15] A. Saxena and R. Dandoloff, Phys. Rev. B 66, 104414 (2002)

[16] A. Saxena and R. Dandoloff, Phys. Rev. B 58, R563 (1998); R. Dan-

doloff and A. Saxena, Eur. Phys. J. B 29, 265 (2002)

[17] V.L. Carvalho-Santos, and R. Dandoloff, Phys. Lett A 376, 3551

(2012)

[18] V.L. Carvalho-Santos, and R. Dandoloff, Braz. J. Phys. 43, (2013)

DOI: 10.1007/s13538-013-0126-1.

[19] L. Giomi, Phys Rev Lett. 109, 136101 (2012)

[20] X. Michalet, D. Bensimon, B. Foulcade, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 168 (1994)

[21] R. Dandoloff and A. Saxena, Phys. Lett. A 358, 421 (2006); X. Peng,
S. Wu, J. Li, D. Suter and J. Du, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 240405 (2010);
Y. Komura and Y. Okabe, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor.: 44, 015002 (2012)

[22] N.D. Mermin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 591 (1979)

[23] G. Napoli and L. Vergori, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 207803 (2012)

[24] A.R. Pereira, E. Ercolessi and A.S.T. Pires, Solid State Comm. 145,
163 (2008); S. Dell'Aringa, E. Ercolessi, G. Morandi, P. Pieri and M.
Roncaglia, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2457 (1997)

[25] R. Rajaraman, Solitons and Instantons: An Introduction to Quantum
Field Theory (Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishng Company), p 37
(1984)

[26] E.B. Bogomolnyi, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 26, 449 (1976)

[27] R. Dandoloff and A. Saxenna, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 44, 045203

(2011)

24

[28] T.R. Powers, G. Huber and R.E. Goldstein, Phys. Rev. E 65, 041901

(2002)

[29] Y. Kozlovsky and M.M. Kozlov, Biophys. J. 85, 85 (2003)

[30] E.W. Weisstein, "Hyperboloid." From MathWorld - A Wolfram Web

Resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Hyperboloid.html

[31] K. Kowalski, J. Rembieli´nski and A. Szcze´sniak, J. Phys. A: Math.

Theor.: 44, 085302 (2011)

[32] M. Bellegia, J.W. Lau, M.A Schofield, Y. Zhu, S. Tandon and M. De
Graef, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 301, 131 (2006); P. Landeros, J. Escrig,
D. Altbir, M. Bahiana and J. dAlbuquerque e Castro, J. Appl. Phys.
100, 044311 (2006)

25

