
Stability of extended defects on boron nitride and graphene monolayers: the role of

chemical environment

L. C. Gomes, S. S. Alexandre, H. Chacham, and R. W. Nunes∗

Departamento de F´ısica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais,

CP 702, 30123-970, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil

(Dated: July 29, 2021)

We perform ab initio calculations that indicate that the relative stability of antiphase boundaries
(APB) with armchair and zigzag chiralities in monolayer boron nitride (BN) is determined by
the chemical potentials of the boron and nitrogen species in the synthesis process. In an N-rich
environment, a zigzag APB with N-rich core is the most stable structure, while under B-rich or
intrinsic growth conditions, an armchair APB with stoichiometric core is the most stable. This
stability transition is shown to arise from a competition between homopolar-bond (B-B and N-N)
and elastic energy costs in the core of the APBs. Moreover, in the presence of a carbon source we
find that a carbon-doped zigzag APB becomes the most stable boundary near the N-rich limit. The
electronic structure of the two types of APBs in BN is shown to be particularly distinct, with the
zigzag APB depicting defect-like deep electronic bands in the band gap, while the armchair APB
shows bulk-like shallow electronic bands.

PACS numbers: 73.22.-f, 73.20.Hb, 71.55.-i

Many proposed applications of nanomaterials require
the ability to control their electronic properties. In par-
ticular, graphene and boron nitride (BN) in the two-
dimensional (2D) monolayer form have become an im-
portant subject of research, owing to their mechanical
strength and a rich variety of physical phenomena con-
nected to their electronic structure.1 The introduction
of structural defects presents an alternative for manip-
ulating the electronic and magnetic properties in these
materials.1 -- 7 In graphene grown on Ni(111) substrates, a
translational grain boundary (GB) has been theoretically
proposed3 and recently observed in STM experiments,4
and the occurrence of magnetism for the quasi-one-
dimensional electronic states introduced by this defect
has been suggested by ab initio calculations.5 This GB
in graphene lies along the zigzag direction and arises due
to the presence of two possible stackings of the graphene
monolayer with respect to the Ni(111) substrate, which
leads to the possibility of domains related by a relative
translation, with the GB emerging as the boundary be-
tween two such domains.4 In the case of monolayer BN
grown on Ni(111), the same stacking mechanism holds,8
and the possibility of engineering smaller band gaps in
this large-band-gap material by the introduction of this
zigzag-direction boundary has been recently considered.6

In this work, we introduce a low-energy stoichiomet-
ric model for an armchair-direction antiphase bound-
ary (APB) in monolayer BN,9 based on a structural
pattern recently observed experimentally in irradiated
graphene.10 Furthermore, we investigate the electronic
properties and compare the stability of several differ-
ent models for extended one-dimensional (1D) defects
in monolayer BN and graphene, including the aforemen-
tioned zigzag and armchair boundaries.

Our ab initio calculations indicate that in graphene the
zigzag GB is more stable than the armchair GB, while in
BN the relative stability of APBs with zigzag and arm-

chair chiralities depends on the chemical potentials of the
B and N species in the synthesis process, with nitrogen-
rich zigzag APBs becoming more stable than stoichio-
metric armchair APBs only when defects are formed un-
der nitrogen-rich conditions. Moreover, in the presence
of carbon dopants, a C-doped zigzag APB becomes the
most stable boundary for the last one-third of the in-
terval of realistic B and N chemical potentials values,
comprising the last part of the intrinsic region plus the
N-rich region. Furthermore, we find that in graphene
the armchair GB introduces weaker resonances near the
Fermi level (FL), associated to defect states that are only
partially confined to the defect core, in contrast with the
strongly localized states characteristic of the zigzag GB.5
In the case of BN, we find that the armchair APB in-
troduces flat bands near the bulk band edges which are
weakly confined to the defect core, while the B-rich, the
N-rich, and the C-doped zigzag APBs lead to the forma-
tion of electronic bands that are deep in the bulk band
gap and strongly localized on the atoms at the defect
core.

In graphene, the translational GB observed in Ref. 4
is obtained by cutting a graphene sheet along the zigzag
direction, displacing the two halves by one-third of the
lattice period in the direction perpendicular to the cut,
and inserting carbon dimers with their common bond
oriented along the cut, generating a line of pentagon-
pentagon-octagon units, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Being
oriented along the zigzag direction, this boundary is la-
beled Z-GB in our discussion.

In the present study, we examine the armchair-
direction counterpart of the Z-GB in graphene. The
armchair grain boundary, which we label A-GB, can be
obtained by cutting a graphene sheet in the armchair
direction and translating one side of the sheet with re-
spect to the other side by half the lattice period along the
armchair direction, generating a line defect that contains

2

B atoms) as shown in Fig. 1(d), while for the zigzag APB
the core is either N-rich or B-rich, if one adopts the cri-
terion of minimizing the number of homopolar (N-N or
B-B) bonds. In our discussion, the N-rich version of the
zigzag boundary, shown in Fig. 1(c), is labeled NZ-APB;
the boron-rich one, shown in Fig. 1(e), is labeled BZ-
APB; a carbon-doped version obtained by replacing the
B2 dimers at the center of the BZ-APB core with C2
dimers, shown in Fig. 1(g), is labeled CZ-APB. A model
for a stoichiometric Z-GB in BN (not an APB in this
case) is also possible, at the cost of introducing an extra
homopolar bond per defect unit, as shown in Fig. 1(h).
We also consider a stoichiometric APB interface in BN
containing homopolar bonds without topological defects,
shown in Fig. 1(f).

for

the

In our study, we employ a first principles approach
based on Kohn-Sham density functional theory (KS-
DFT),11 as implemented in the SIESTA code.12 All cal-
culations are performed using the generalized-gradient
approximation (GGA)
exchange-correlation
term.13 Interactions between valence electrons and ionic
cores are described by Troullier-Martins pseudopoten-
tials.14 A double-ζ pseudoatomic basis set augmented
with polarization orbitals is employed, with an energy
cutoff of 0.01 Ry. Structural optimization is performed
until the residual force on each atom is less than 0.04
eV/A. Supercells in our study are periodic in the mono-
layer plane and large vacuum regions are included to im-
pose periodic boundary conditions in the perpendicular
direction. Ribbon geometries are described below. Con-
vergence tests were performed and supercell sizes were
chosen such that interactions between defects in the plane
and between each layer and its periodic images were neg-
ligible.

We seek to compare the relative stability of the above
1D defects in graphene and BN. In the case of graphene,
the formation energy of the GBs per unit length EGB
is
given by

f

EGB

f =

tot (N ) − N µbulk
EGB

graph

(cid:96)

(1)

f

f

and EA−GB

Our calculated values for EZ−GB

where Edef
tot (N ) is the total energy of the N -atom super-
cell containing a GB, µbulk
graph =-154.532 eV is the bulk
chemical potential of graphene, obtained as the total en-
ergy per atom in a pristine graphene calculation, and (cid:96)
is the length of the supercell along the defect direction.
in
graphene are included in Table I. In this material, the
Z-GB is more stable than the A-GB by 0.25 eV/A
due to the smaller bond-length and bond-angle dis-
tortions from the ideal bulk values (dbulk = 1.442 A
and θbulk = 120◦ in our calculations) incurred in the
pentagon-pentagon-octagon core of the Z-GB, when com-
pared with the tetragon-octagon core of the A-GB. Av-
erage bond lengths and bond angles, as well as maximum
and minimum values and standard deviations for these
quantities are included in Table I for the Z-GB and the
A-GB. While average values are similar for both bond

FIG. 1: Structures of grain boundaries (GB) and antiphase
boundaries (APB) in monolayer graphene and boron nitride.
Boron, nitrogen, and carbon atoms are shown by orange,
green, and grey circles, respectively. (a) Z-GB: a graphene
GB with zigzag chirality.
(b) A-GB: a graphene GB with
armchair chirality. (c) NZ-APB: a zigzag APB in BN with
N-rich core. (d) A-APB: an armchair APB in BN with sto-
ichiometric core.
(e) BZ-APB: a zigzag APB in BN with
B-rich core. (f) HA-APB: an armchair APB in BN with stoi-
chiometric core consisting of hexagons with homopolar bonds.
(g) CZ-APB: a zigzag APB in BN with carbon-doped core.
(h) Z-GB: a zigzag GB in BN with stoichiometric core. Core
atoms for zigzag and armchair defects are shown by darker
circles in (a) and (b), respectively.

squares and octagons alternately arranged in its core, as
shown in Fig. 1(b). Small finite segments of this core
structure have been observed in graphene as result of re-
construction after electronic-beam irradiation.10 Chiral
GB geometries may also be built by combining these two
basic structures.

In a binary system like monolayer BN, inversion sym-
metry is absent and an APB is formed at the interface
of two domains with opposite assignments of B and N
atoms to the two triangular sublattices of the BN hon-
eycomb lattice. In this material, the geometries of the
graphene Z-GB and A-GB translate into APBs: the core
of the armchair boundary, which we label A-APB, is nat-
urally stoichiometric (having the same number of N and

lengths and bond angles, deviations from the bulk refer-
ence values are larger in the A-GB core.

This indicates that the nature of the energy difference
between the A-GB and the Z-GB in graphene is essen-
tially elastic. Indeed, a Keating-model calculation with
a Keating potential fitted for diamond carbon15 predicts
the elastic energy of the A-GB to be about twice that
of the Z-GB, in qualitative agreement with our ab initio
results. A more quantitative agreement would require
fitting the Keating potential to the graphene bonding
environment.

Ef

¯d

dmax dmin σd

σθ
Z-GB 0.48 1.45 1.48 1.41 0.02 120◦ 141.7◦ 104.6◦ 11.1◦
A-GB 0.73 1.44 1.52 1.40 0.04 120◦ 147.9◦
16.8◦

90◦

θmax

θmin

¯θ

TABLE I: Formation energies (Ef in eV/A), and average,
maximum, minimum, and dispersion values for bond lengths
(d in A) and bond angles (θ) for zigzag and armchair grain
boundaries in graphene.

In BN, the lack of inversion symmetry means that
in a periodic supercell calculation for non-stoichiometric
boundaries, such as the NZ-APB and its BZ-APB part-
ner, both boundaries are included in the periodic cell,
hence only the sum of the formation energies of the two
1D defects can be extracted from such calculation. Ob-
taining formation energies of individual boundaries re-
quires using BN ribbons, containing a single boundary in
the middle and hydrogen-saturated edges. The ribbons
are finite in the direction perpendicular to the 1D bound-
ary and periodic in the parallel direction. Figure 2(a)
shows the BN ribbons employed for the NZ-APB calcu-
lation, and Fig. 2(b) shows the ribbon employed in the
A-APB calculations. The ribbon employed for BZ-APB
calculations (not shown in Fig. 2) is obtained from the
NZ-APB one by swapping the B and N atoms.

Stoichiometry is determinant for the stability of the
various APBs and GBs in BN, since the chemical poten-
tials of the B and N species will depend on the growth
conditions, i.e., on the sources of B and N atoms in the
synthesis process. The formation energy of the BN rib-
bons depends on the ribbon stoichiometry and is thus a
function of the chemical potentials for B, N, and H. As-
suming that defect formation occurs in equilibrium with
a bulk BN monolayer, we impose that µB + µN = µBN ,
where µBN is the total energy per BN pair for a pristine
BN monolayer, and explore the APB formation energy
EAP B
as a function of µB and µN by defining two limit-
ing chemical potential environments: in the B-rich case
µB is obtained from the total energy per atom for the
α-boron bulk phase (α − B), and in the N-rich situation
µN is obtained from the total energy per atom of an N2

f

3

FIG. 2: Ribbon and triangle geometries for computation of
extended-defect energies in monolayer boron nitride. (a) Rib-
bon with N-rich zigzag antiphase boundary in the middle and
N-rich zigzag edges. (b) Ribbon with armchair boundary in
the middle and armchair edges. (c) Triangle with the same
N-rich zigzag edges as ribbon in (a). (d) Triangle with the
same armchair edges as ribbon in (b).

molecular crystal calculation. We write
µN + µB = µBN = −350.187 eV ;

EN2
tot
2

µmax
N =
N = µBN − EαB
tot
µmin
12

= −270.290 eV (N − rich) ;

(2)

= −273.712 eV (B − rich) .

We emphasize that our range of values for µB and µN
are determined for a condition of equilibrium with solid-
state phases of BN and N (or B). These physical con-
straints, previously considered in calculations of defects
in bulk BN,16 BCN monolayers,17 BN fullerenes,18,19 and
BN nanocones,20 have not been considered in a recent cal-
culation.21 As shown in the following, the determination
of physically acceptable ranges for µN and µB is crucial
to determine which extended defect structure is the most
stable under N-rich, intrinsic, or B-rich conditions.

Given the chemical potentials in Eq. 2, we define the
formation energy of the BN ribbons Erib
f , which includes
the formation energies of the APB and of the edges, as
follows:

tot − NBµB − NN µN − NH µH
Erib

Erib

f =

Erib

f = EAP B

f

(cid:96)
.

+ 2Eedge

f

(3)

(4)

where Erib
tot is the calculated total energy of the ribbon, (cid:96)
is the length of the ribbon along the APB direction, NB,
NN , and NH are the numbers of boron, nitrogen, and
hydrogen atoms in the ribbon, and µB, µN , and µH are
the respective chemical potentials.

f

In order to obtain EAP B

from Eq. 4 above, we follow
the procedure from Ref. 21 and consider BN triangles in
which the three hydrogen-saturated edges are the same
as those in the corresponding ribbons, as shown in Fig. 2.
The formation energy of an N -atom triangle E
is de-
fined similarly to Eq. 3, and can be decomposed into

(cid:52)
f

4

and for the triangles with B-rich zigzag edges (BZ-edge),
under B-rich and N-rich environments, are shown in the
upper and middle panels of Fig. 3, respectively. From
the slope of the curves in Fig. 3 we obtain the NZ-edge
and BZ-edge energies included in Table II. In order to
check the consistency of our approach, we also compute
the edge energy for triangles shown in Fig. 2(d) with
armchair edges (A-edge), and EA−AP B
from Eq. 4 for
the ribbon containing an A-APB and armchair edges,
shown in Fig. 2(b). The fitting of the energies of the
armchair-edge triangles is shown in the lower panel in
Fig. 3, and the energy of the A-edge is also included in
Table II. The A-edge is stoichiometric, hence its energy
is independent of the B and N chemical potentials.

f

λedge
f

(eV)

Evtx

f

(eV)

A-edge

0.43

0.06

B-rich N-rich B-rich N-rich
-2.56
7.54

-0.59
1.09

3.15
1.83

NZ-edge 0.37
BZ-edge 0.14

TABLE II: Edge energy per edge unit λedge
f orm and vertex en-
ergy Evtx
, obtained from fitting of triangle energies to Eq. 5,
for the armchair edge (A-edge), the N-rich zigzag edge (NZ-
edge), and the B-rich zigzag edge (BZ-edge).

f

It is worth commenting on the negative slope of Ef for
the NZ-edge under an N-rich environment. It indicates
that the reaction by which hydrogen saturates the edge
is exothermic and is consistent with experimental obser-
vations of a very high stability for nitrogen-terminated
edges in BN islands.22 -- 24 Indeed, the strong tendency of
BN patches to display a triangular shape is connected
with the stability of the NZ-edges.

f

f

f

f

f

Having obtained Eedge

from the above procedure, we
can obtain EAP B
from Eq. 4. The results for the five
APB models, as well as EZ−GB
for the Z-GB in BN, as
functions of µN , are shown in Fig. 4. For the stoichiomet-
ric models EAP B
is independent of µN . The consistency
of the above procedure is attested by the fact that EAP B
values obtained using supercells and the H-terminated
ribbons agree to within 0.6% in all cases, as included in
Table III (for the NZ-APB NZ-APB we compare the sum
of the formation energies).
It is evident that the A-APB is the more stable un-
doped boundary across ∼80% of the range of chemical
potentials we consider, with the NZ-APB becoming the
most stable one in the N-rich limit of µN . In the pres-
ence of a carbon source, the carbon-doped CZ-APB is
the least stable in a B-rich environment, but becomes
the most stable boundary for about one third of the in-
terval of µN values, from the end of the intrinsic regime
through the N-rich limit. We note that the elastic-energy
cost of the A-APB should be even higher than that for
the A-GB in graphene, because in BN the bond angles
at the core of the defect depart even more strongly from
the ideal bulk value of 120◦ than in graphene, as can

FIG. 3: Formation energy of BN triangles as a function of
the number of edge units. The upper (middle) panel shows
the energies of the NZ-edge (BZ-edge) for N-rich and B-rich
environments. The lower panel shows the energy of the stoi-
chiometric A-edge.

three components: a bulk one that scales with the area
of the triangle (∝ N ), an edge one that scales with the
edge length (∝ N 1/2), and a vertex component that does
not scale with the size of the triangle. Since the bulk
of the triangles is composed of BN units, and BN bulk
is our reference chemical potential (c.f. Eqs. 2 and 3),
(cid:52)
the bulk component of E
f vanishes by definition. It is
then possible to obtain the edge energy per edge unit, by
(cid:52)
considering triangles of different sizes, and fitting E
f to
a linear form:

(cid:52)
f = λedge
E

f

nedge + Evtx

f

;

(5)

f

where λedge
is the edge energy per edge unit, nedge is the
number of edge units in the triangle, which for zigzag-
edge triangles and ribbons is the number of N (B) atoms
saturated with one hydrogen in Fig. 2, and for armchair-
edge triangles and ribbons is the number of boat-like BN
units at the edges. Evtx
is the contribution from the
three vertices of the triangles.

f

The fittings we obtain for the energies of the triangles
shown in Fig. 2(c), with N-rich zigzag edges (NZ-edge),

5
εBB = −50.40 eV, and εN N = −178.49 eV, for carbon-
carbon, boron-nitrogen, carbon-nitrogen, boron-boron,
and nitrogen-nitrogen bonds, respectively. Within the
model, the values of EQ for one period of either the
H-APB or the Z-GB, as well as the sum of EQ val-
ues for one period of the NZ-APB and the BZ-APB,
should all be ∼4.62 eV higher than the value for the
A-APB, i.e., EH−AP B
=
EA−AP B
+4.62 eV. Using the BN Keating potential from
Ref. 25, we compute the values of Eel for the five different
boundaries. Results for Eel, EQ, and Ef = EQ + Eel for
the A-APB, H-APB, Z-GB, and the sum of the values for
the NZ-APB and BZ-APB, computed using this scheme,
are included in Table IV.

= E(N Z+BZ)−AP B

Q

Q

= EZ−GB

Q

Q

Boundary

A-APB

NZ-APB + BZ-APB

HA-APB

Z-GB

EQ(eV/A) Eel (eV/A) Ef (eV/A)

0.00
0.92
1.06
0.93

1.02
1.08
0.18
0.70

1.02
2.00
1.24
1.63

TABLE IV: Formation energy of grain boundaries and an-
tiphase boundaries in monolayer BN from combination of elas-
tic energy and chemical-bond energy models.

Despite the fact that this simplified partition of Ef
fails in describing, even qualitatively, the energy differ-
ence between the A-APB and the average of the NZ-APB
and BZ-APB, it correctly predicts that the Z-GB has the
highest value of Ef , followed by the H-APB. This mod-
eling is useful because it allows us to establish that EQ is
the predominant factor in determining the relative sta-
bility of the various boundary models in our study. Note
the very low value of Eel for the H-APB, with a defect
core consisting of hexagons only, which is offset by the
high energy cost of two "wrong" bonds per defect unit
in the core. On the other hand, the highest value of
Eel is found for the A-APB, being associated with the
strong departure from the bulk bond lengths and bond
angles in the fourfold and eightfold rings at the core of
this boundary. However, this is compensated by the fact
that the chemical energy cost for the A-APB is very low
(EA−AP B
= 0 within the simplified bond-energy model
above).

Q

Again, a quantitative agreement between the above
modeling and the ab initio results would require fitting
both the Keating potential and the bond-energy model to
bonding environments that are more similar to those in
the boundary geometries in our study. This analysis also
provides a qualitative explanation for one of the ingre-
dients that determines the stability of the carbon-doped
CZ-APB boundary: because this structure is obtained
from the BZ-APB by replacing the B2 dimer in the cen-
ter of the defect core with a C2 dimer, the elastic energy
is reduced because the length of the C-C bonds is similar
to the length of the BN bulk matrix, unlike the longer
B2-dimer bond. The other ingredient is electronic, and

FIG. 4: Formation energy Ef of grain boundaries and an-
tiphase boundaries in boron nitride as a function of the ni-
trogen chemical potential µN . The maximum and minimum
values of µN are given in the text (see Eq. 2)

be seen in Fig 1. Unlike the case in graphene, however,
BN strongly prefers even-membered topological defects
in order to avoid the energetically expensive homopolar
bonds, except in the N-rich limit where N-N bonds be-
come more favorable.18

Boundary

A-APB
HA-APB

Z-GB

NZ-APB + BZ-APB

Ef (eV/A)

supercell

ribbon

0.44
0.81
0.96
1.27

0.44
0.81
0.95
1.27

N-rich - ribbon B-rich - ribbon

NZ-APB
BZ-APB
CZ-APB

0.41
0.86
0.19

0.76
0.51
0.98

TABLE III: Comparison of formation energy values Ef of
grain boundaries and antiphase boundaries in monolayer BN
computed with supercells and ribbon geometries. Supercells
are stoichiometric and corresponding Ef values do not depend
on chemical potentials of B and N. For the ribbons, values for
N-rich and B-rich environments are included.

We can use a combination of two models to under-
stand qualitatively the ordering of Ef values in Fig. 4.
The idea is to divide the contributions to the formation
energies of the boundaries in two components, an elastic
one Eel, which we estimate by employing a Keating po-
tential fitted for cubic BN,25 and a chemical energy EQ
that is computed using the bond-energy model developed
in Ref. 17 to account for the energetics of CBN sheets of
various stoichiometries. In this latter model, two-atom
bonds are assigned bond-energy values, which reflect the
average energy of each type of bond across the various
BCN sheets included in the fitting procedure.
The bond-energy values derived in Ref. 17 are εCC =
−103.24 eV, εBN = −116.73 eV, εCN = −141.67 eV,

µNµNµΝ0.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0Ef (eV/Å) B-richA-APBNZ-APBBZ-APBHA-APBZ-GBN-richminmaxCZ-APB6

FIG. 5: Band structure and density of states for the A-GB and
Z-GB in graphene. (a) Brillouin zone corresponding to the
supercell calculations in the present study. (b) Black curves
show the A-GB supercell band structure. Blue curves show
bulk bands folded onto defect supercell.
(c) and (d) show
total density of states (DOS) and the DOS projected on the
core atoms for the Z-GB and A-GB, respectively.

is determined by stoichiometry (i.e., the chemical poten-
tials) and the fact that in low coordination bonding en-
vironments a B-B bond is strongly less favorable than a
C-C bond.

Let us now examine the electronic structure of the
graphene boundaries. The electronic structure of the Z-
GB in graphene has been discussed in Ref. 5, where the
appearance of a highly-localized quasi-1D state, intro-
duced by this boundary in the density of states (DOS)
of graphene, has been shown to lead to a magnetic insta-
[The Z-GB is labeled GB(2, 0)(2, 0) in the nota-
bility.
tion employed in Ref. 5.] Figures 5(b) and (d) show the
electronic band structure and the DOS for the A-GB in
graphene, and the DOS for the Z-GB is shown in Fig. 5(c)
for comparison. The Brillouin zone corresponding to all
defect supercells in this work is shown in Fig. 5 (a). The
Γ-X and Y-L lines are parallel to the defect direction (the
x-axis of the supercell) in all cases. In order to identify
the boundary-related electronic bands, and also to exam-
ine the degree of localization of the corresponding states
on the core of the boundaries, we project the DOS onto
the orbitals centered on the core atoms in each case. The
core atoms for each defect geometry are shown by darker
circles in Fig. 1(a) and (b), and we use the same defini-
tion of defect core for the graphene and BN boundaries.

From the A-GB band structure, we can see that this
boundary introduces only small electron and hole pock-
ets near the Fermi level (FL), that show as two weak
resonances within ±0.2 eV from the FL in the DOS. The
degree of localization of these electronic states on the
eight atoms located at the A-GB core is much weaker
than what is found for the magnetic resonance in the
Z-GB case.5 In the latter case, nearly 90% of the DOS

FIG. 6: (a) and (b) Band structure and density of states for
bulk BN. Blue and green curves in (b) show the contributions
of orbitals of the N and B atoms to the total DOS, respec-
tively. (c) and (d) Band structure and density of states for
the A-APB in BN. The contribution of the core-atom orbitals
to the total DOS is shown by blue (N orbitals) and green (B
orbitals) curves in (d). Defect bands in the gap are shown
by green and blue curves, according to the dominant atomic-
orbital contribution in each case.

derives from the ten core atoms. This is shown by the
partial DOS (PDOS) for the core atoms as red curves in
Fig. 5(b) and (d). In the A-GB case, these resonances are
much more spread out into the bulk of the cell, and the
contribution from the core atoms is much smaller than
in the Z-GB. The A-GB also gives rise to stronger res-
onances at ±1.0 eV from the FL, connected to the flat
portion of the defect bands seen in the band structure in
Fig. 5(a)].

In the case of BN, we concentrate on the low-energy
A-APB, NZ-APB, BZ-APB, and CZ-APB models.
In
Fig. 6(a) and (b) we show the band structure and the
density of states (DOS) for a pristine bulk BN mono-
layer. For ease of comparison, the bulk calculation was
performed for a supercell of nearly the same dimensions
as those employed for the BN boundaries. For our discus-
sion, the important features of the bulk electronic struc-
ture are the size of the gap (∼4.7 eV within the GGA-
DFT scheme) and the composition of the electronic states
at the band edges: the top of the valence band is mainly
composed of nitrogen pz orbitals while the bottom of the
conduction band derives from the boron pz orbitals.

The electronic bands and the corresponding DOS for
the A-APB are shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). The A-APB
introduces one set of two bands near each of the band
edges, that show little dispersion and retain the charac-
ter of the corresponding parent bulk bands. The acceptor
bands near the valence-band maximum (VBM) are com-
posed primarily of nitrogen pz orbitals, while the donor
bands near the conduction-band minimum (CBM) con-

sist of boron pz orbitals, with ∼40% of the DOS con-
centrated on the core atoms in both cases, as shown by
the core-projected PDOS curve in Fig. 6. Both sets of
bands are shallow (∼0.2 eV split from the corresponding
band edges), and the lack of sizeable dispersion indicates
very large effective masses and low mobilities of carriers,
should doping of A-GB defect bands become feasible.

The NZ-APB and BZ-APB display much richer elec-
tronic structures. The bands and DOS curves for these
boundaries are shown in Fig. 7. We include in this fig-
ure the electronic states of the boundaries obtained from
the ribbon calculations, from which we can identify the
states from each of the boundaries individually. One ob-
servation regarding the consistency of this procedure is
that the electronic states associated with the edges of
the ribbon are either shallow or resonant with the bulk
bands, and do not mix with the defect bands, as can be
observed in the PDOS plots in Fig. 7(b) and (d) for the
NZ-APB and the BZ-APB, respectively. This allows us
to easily identify the gap states associated with the NZ-
APB and BZ-APB. Moreover, we verify that the elec-
tronic structure we obtain from the supercell calculation
[not shown in Fig. 7 for conciseness], which contains the
states from both boundaries, is very consistent with a su-
perposition of the corresponding states from the ribbons
for each boundary, in the range of energies of the defect
gap states shown in this figure.

Generally, we can see in Fig. 7 that the NZ-APB and
BZ-APB boundaries introduce much deeper defect bands
into the gap of the BN bulk, resulting in a much larger
reduction of the electronic band gap in the spatial region
surrounding either the NZ-APB or the BZ-APB6 than
in the case of the A-APB. Furthermore, the dispersions
for these bands are much larger, indicating carrier with
potentially larger mobilities than in the A-GB states.

The electronic structure of the BZ-APB ribbon is
shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b). Because boron-boron bonds
tend to be much longer than the other bonds in these
BN systems, the BZ-APB introduces a large compressive
strain in its neighborhood, and we observe three defect
bands connected with this boundary. Starting from the
lower part of the gap, we observe a shallower band with
an extended van Hove singularity connected to a large flat
portion of this band, starting at the Γ point and extend-
ing up to the k-point at ∼0.6 of the Γ-X line, after which
it disperses down and mixes with the bulk states, when
reaching the X point at the edge of the one-dimensional
BZ. This band derives primarily from the orbitals of the
N atoms located on the BN zigzag chains in the core of
the BZ-APB (∼58% of the total DOS), with smaller con-
tributions from the zigzag B atoms (∼8%), and from the
two atoms forming the B2 dimer at the geometric center
of the defect (∼3%).
The BZ-APB also introduces a deeper flat band lying
∼0.5 eV above the VBM, with a total dispersion of ∼0.2
eV. This band is very strongly localized on the B2 dimer
at the center, with ∼75% of the total DOS deriving from
the orbitals of the dimer atoms, with smaller contribu-

7

FIG. 7: Band structure along the Γ-X line (parallel to the
APB direction) and density of states: (a) and (b) for the BZ-
APB; and (c) and (d) for the NZ-APB. The contribution of
the core-atom orbitals to the total DOS is shown by blue (N
orbitals) and green (B orbitals) PDOS curves in (b) and (d).
Defect bands in the gap are shown by green and blue curves,
according to the dominant atomic-orbital contribution in each
case. The DOS features associated to the ribbon-edge states
are shown by orange curves in (b) and (d).

tions of ∼12% and ∼4% from the N and B atoms on
the BN zigzag chains in the core, respectively. The char-
acteristic 1D van Hove singularities associated with the
minimum and maximum of this band can be observed in
the DOS plot in Fig. 7(b).
In the upper part of the gap, the BZ-APB introduces a
deep dispersive band that lies ∼1.7 eV below the CBM, at
the Γ point, and at the X point it reaches its maximum of
∼0.7 below the CBM, for a total dispersion of 1 eV. This
band is composed mostly of orbitals of the B atoms at
the BZ-APB core, with 53% of the DOS coming from the
B2 dimer at the center and 25% from the B atoms on the
BN zigzag chains shouldering the B2 dimer. A smaller
contribution of 8% derives from the N core atoms on the
zigzag chains.

Electronic bands, DOS, and PDOS for the NZ-APB
ribbon are shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d). In the lower part
of the gap this boundary introduces a band with a max-
imum energy of ∼0.7 eV above the VBM, near the edge
of the BZ at the X point, that shows a dispersion of ∼1.0
eV. Its minimum is at the Γ point where it becomes reso-
nant and mixed with the bulk states in the VBM region.
For most of the Γ-X line of the 1D BZ this band is deep
in the gap and strongly localized, with ∼88% of the DOS
concentrated on the NZ-APB core atoms (∼73% on the
N core atoms). In the DOS plot, this bands shows a 1D
van Hove singularity above the peak corresponding to the
VBM.

In the upper part of gap, the NZ-APB also introduces a
band near the CBM that shows similar characteristics as

8

is determined by B and N chemical potential conditions
(emulating the corresponding synthesis conditions).
In
an N-rich synthesis environment, a zigzag APB with pen-
tagonal and octagonal rings in its N-rich core is the most
stable structure in this material (among the models we
considered), while for B-rich or intrinsic conditions a stoi-
chiometric armchair APB with tetragons and octagons in
its cores is the most stable. Such stability transition as a
function of B and N chemical potentials is shown to arise
from a competition between "wrong-bond" (homopolar
B-B and N-N bonds) and elastic-energy costs at the core
of the APBs. This is contrasted with analogous cases of
extended defects in graphene, where the geometry with
pentagonal and octagonal rings is the most stable. In the
presence of carbon dopants, a carbon-doped zigzag APB
becomes the most stable boundary for the last third part
of the interval of realistic B and N chemical potentials
values, comprising the last part of the intrinsic region
plus the N-rich region. The electronic structure of the
APBs in monolayer BN is shown to be particularly dis-
tinct, with the pentagonal-octagonal APB depicting a
defect-like electronic structure with deep bands in the
band gap, and the tetragonal-octagonal APB depicting
bulk-like shallow electronic bands derived from the cor-
responding band edges.

Note added: A brief account of the present work was
previously presented in a scientific meeting, and a sum-
mary was published in Ref. 9. During the preparation
of this manuscript, we became aware of a recent work26
that also considers the A-APB in BN, of which we had
no previous knowledge.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge support from the Brazilian
agencies CNPq, FAPEMIG, Rede de Pesquisa em Nan-
otubos de Carbono, INCT de Nanomateriais de Carbono,
and Instituto do Milenio em Nanotecnologia-MCT.

FIG. 8: Band structure along the Γ-X line (parallel to the
APB direction) and density of states for the CZ-APB. In (b)
the contribution of the core-atom orbitals to the total DOS
is shown by blue (N orbitals), green (B orbitals), and red (C
orbitals) PDOS curves. Defect bands in the gap are shown
by green and red curves, according to the dominant atomic-
orbital contribution in each case.

the above one, being deep in the gap near Γ and becoming
shallow and mixed with the bulk states when it reaches
the edge of the BZ at the X point. This band is very
strongly localized on the B and N atoms along the zigzag
chain in the core of the NZ-APB, with ∼84% of the DOS
concentrated on the orbitals of the B atoms and ∼7% on
the orbitals of the N atoms. The corresponding 1D van
Hove singularity is seen in the DOS plot in Fig. 7(d).

The electronic states of the CZ-APB show a similar
pattern. We observe the appearance of two bands that
are reminiscent of those of a one-dimensional dimerized
chain of carbon atoms, with a gap of ∼2.6 eV at the BZ
edged, and dispersions of ∼1.0 eV (0.6 eV) for the lower
(higher) band. The higher band is derived equally from
C and B orbitals, while the lower band is dominated by
the C orbitals, but with sizeable contributions from B
and N orbitals. Both bands are strongly localized on the
defect core, with 78% and 88% of the total DOS deriving
from the core-atom orbitals.

In conclusion, our calculations indicate that the rela-
tive stability of antiphase boundaries (APB) with arm-
chair and zigzag chiralities in planar boron nitride (BN)

∗ corresponding

author;

Electronic

address:

rw-

nunes@fisica.ufmg.br

1 A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S.
Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109
(2009).

2 F. Banhart, J. Kotakoski, and A. V. Krasheninnikov, ACS

Nano 5, 26 (2011).

3 M. U. Kahaly, S. P. Singh, and U. V. Waghmare, Small 4,

2209 (2008).

Mousseau, and P. Pochet, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 132405
(2012).

8 W. Auwarter, M. Muntwiler, J. Osterwalder, and T. Gre-

ber, Surf. Sci. Lett. 545, L735 (2003).

9 S. S. Alexandre, L. C. Gomes, H. Chacham, and R.
W. Nunes, Bulletin of the American Physical Society
57, http://meetings.aps.org/link/BAPS.2012.MAR.B7.14
(2012).

10 J. Kotakoski, A. V. Krasheninnikov, U. Kaiser, and J. C.

4 J. Lahiri, Y. Lin, P. Bozkurt,I. I. Oleynik, and M. Batzill,

Meyer, Phys. Rev. Lett 106, 105505 (2011).

Nat. Nanotech. 5, 326 (2010).

5 S. S. Alexandre, A. D. L´ucio, A. H. C. Neto, and R. W.

Nunes, Nano Letters 12, 5097 (2012).

6 X. L. Li, X. J. Wu, X. C. Zeng, and J. L. Yang, ACS Nano

6, 4104 (2012).

11 W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
12 J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. Garcia, J. Junquera,
P. Ordejon, and D. Sanchez-Portal, J. Phys. Cond. Matt.
14, 2745 (2002).

13 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.

7 E. Machado-Charry, P. Boulanger, L. Genovese, N.

Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

9

14 N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993

11, 3113 (2011).

(1991).

15 R. M. Martin, Solid State Comm. 8, 799 (1970).
16 W. Orellana and H. Chacham, Phys. Rev. B 63, 63, 125205

(2001).

22 K. K. Kim, A. Hsu, X. T. Jia, S. M. Kim, Y. S. Shi, M. Hof-
mann, D. Nezich, J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva, M. Dresselhaus,
T. Palacios, and J. Kong, Nano Letters 12, 161 (2012).

23 C. H. Jin, F. Lin, K. Suenaga, and S. Iijima, Phys. Rev.

17 M. S. C. Mazzoni, R. W. Nunes, S. Azevedo, and H.

Lett. 102, 195505 (2009).

Chacham, Phys. Rev. B 73, 073108 (2006).

24 J. C. Meyer, A. Chuvilin, G. Algara-Siller, J. Biskupek,

18 S. S. Alexandre, H. Chacham, and R. W. Nunes, Phys.

and U. Kaiser, Nano Letters 9, 2683 (2009).

Rev. B 63, 045402 (2001).

25 K. Kim, W. R. L. Lambrecht, and B. Segall Phys. Rev. B

19 S. S. Alexandre, R. W. Nunes, and H. Chacham, Phys.

53, 16310 (1996).

Rev. B 66, 085406 (2002).

26 Y. Liu, X. Zou, and B. I. Yakobson ACS Nano 6, 7053

20 S. Azevedo, M. S. C. Mazzoni, R. W. Nunes, and H.

(2012).

Chacham, Phys. Rev. B 70, 205412 (2004).

21 Y. Liu, S. Bhowmick, and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Letters

