Journal of Computational Electronics manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Atomistic deconstruction of current flow in graphene based
hetero-junctions

Redwan N. Sajjad · Carlos Polanco · Avik W. Ghosh

3
1
0
2
 
b
e
F
 
8
1
 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m
.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 
1
v
3
7
4
4
.
2
0
3
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract We describe the numerical modeling of current
flow in graphene heterojunctions, within the Keldysh Lan-
dauer Non-equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) formalism.
By implementing a k-space approach along the transverse
modes, coupled with partial matrix inversion using the Re-
cursive Green’s function Algorithm (RGFA), we can sim-
ulate on an atomistic scale current flow across devices ap-
proaching experimental dimensions. We use the numerical
platform to deconstruct current flow in graphene, compare
with experimental results on conductance, conductivity and
quantum Hall, and deconstruct the physics of electron ‘op-
tics’ and pseudospintronics in graphene p − n junctions. We
also demonstrate how to impose exact open boundary condi-
tions along the edges to minimize spurious edge reflections.
Keywords NEGF, RGFA, graphene, electron ’optics’
PACS 85.80.Fi · 81.07.Nb · 73.63.Rt · 72.80.Vp

1 Introduction

Ever since its inception [1], graphene as a material has occu-
pied a unique place between one dimensional pi-conjugated
organic molecules and three dimensional bulk crystalline
solids with well defined bandstructures. The quasi-ballistic
scattering lengths [2, 3], photon like dispersion [4] and chi-
ral electron flow [5] together promote nontrivial transport
physics in graphene, opening up various device possibilities
that necessitate detailed numerical modeling. While the pho-
tonic bandstructures argue for a continuum model of mod-
est sized device segments, scattering at heterojunction inter-
faces [6] and edges requires a detailed atomistic treatment.
Redwan N. Sajjad · Carlos Polanco · Avik W. Ghosh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Charlottesville,
VA-22904, USA
E-mail: redwan@virginia.edu

The aim of this paper is to describe practical techniques for
simulating quantum transport through graphene based het-
erojunctions, compare various transport regimes with exper-
iments associated with the chiral nature of electron transmis-
sion at graphene heterojunctions. We also point out some of
the unique electronic properties of bilayer graphene, but un-
less otherwise stated, the results are for single layer graphene.

2 Simulation platform

The Non-equilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) formalism
[7] provides a unified, ‘bottom-up’ platform for modeling
quantum flow of electrons. Indeed, it has been successfully
applied to understand transport physics in materials and sys-
tems as diverse as organic molecules [8], carbon nanotubes
[9, 10], graphene [11–16], silicon nanowires [17–22], spin-
tronics, nanomagnets [23, 24], nanoscale phonon transport
[25–27]. A challenge however is the sheer problem size as-
sociated with atomistic deconstruction of experimentally rel-
evant dimensions, typically hundreds of nanometers, as well
as the scattering physics at the atomistically rough edges.
We employ a recursive technique to simplify the problem
size in order to make such a deconstruction tractable.

2.1 Recursive Green’s function Algorithm (RGFA)

The central entity for quantum kinetics in a weakly interact-
ing system is the retarded Green’s function, defined as,
G = (E I − H − Σ1 − Σ2 )−1
(1)
H is the Hamiltonian matrix of graphene, described in this
paper using a minimal one pz orbital basis per carbon atom
with t0 = −3eV being the hopping parameter. Σ1,2 are the
self energy matrices from the source and drain contacts, and

2

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

done by stepping through the above equation from right to
left starting at layer N − 1, with the right connected Green’s
function for the N th layer

gN ,N = [E I − HL − UL − Σ2 ]−1
(5)
Once we reach layer 1 and extract g2,2 , the device Green’s
function component for that layer is then calculated from
G1,1 = (E I − D1 − Σ1 − t1,2g2,2t2,1 )−1
(6)
where D1 = H1,1 + U1 . The remaining layer block diagonal
matrices are calculated by stepping through from left to right
using,
GL,L = gL,L + gL,LtL,L−1GL−1,L−1tL−1,L gL,L
with L = (2, . . . , N ).

(7)

Fig. 1 Recursive Green’s Function Algorithm (RGFA) requires par-
titioning the structure in left contact, device (layers of N) and right
contact.

2.1.2 From Green’s function to conductance and
non-equilibrium carrier density

Γ1,2 are the corresponding anti-Hermitian parts representing
the energy level broadening associated with charge injection
and removal. The corresponding spectral function and quan-
tum mechanical total transmission are given by
A = i(G − G † )
T = T r(Γ1G Γ2G † )
From the diagonal blocks of the layer Green’s functions,
(2)
we can calculate the spectral function
The local density of states is obtained from the diagonal el-
AL,L = i(GL,L − G †
(8)
ements of A divided by 2π .
L,L )
The contact self energy matrices Σ1,2 are calculated from,
The left connected spectral function for layer L is given by,
Σ = τ gτ † , where g is the surface Green’s function of the
L,L = GL,1Γ1,1G †
AL
(9)
L,1
contact and τ is the coupling matrix between the contact
which requires evaluating a corner block of G
and graphene. The surface Green’s function g is found by
GL,1 = gL,L (−tL,L−1 )GL−1,1
solving the following equation recursively
(10)
1 ]−1
g = [α − τ1 gτ †
once again by stepping through from left to right, starting
(3)
with G1,1 in layer L=2. All the matrices from Eqs. 4-10 are
where α = E I − H for the layered contact unit cell. For
NL × NL , where NL is the number of atoms in one layer. Since
speedy convergence of g, we use a decimation technique
matrix inversion is an N 3 procedure, inverting substantially
outlined in [28].
smaller matrices at a time leads to considerable computa-
Inverting the matrix in Eq. 1 is computationally expen-
tional savings overall.
sive and goes out of hand even for a small structure (width>5nm).
The total conductance is calculated from the transmis-
The Recursive Green’s Function Algorithm (RGFA) is a fast
sion over all modes
practical method to avoid inverting the entire matrix by brute
G = G0 · T r(Γ1,1 [A1,1 − G1,1Γ1,1G †
(11)
1,1 ])
force, but instead extract only select, relevant blocks of the
G matrix, as described in Ref. [29], [30]. For instance the
where G0 = 2q2/h takes care of spin degeneracy, while val-
transmission across a layered device involves only a corner
ley degeneracy is captured with the graphene Hamiltonian
block of the G matrix, G1,L , while the density of states in-
The non-equilibrium carrier density at each layer is cal-
(cid:90) ∞
volves only a diagonal block GL,L , enabling such partial in-
culated from the above quantities as
version.
dE
L,L + f2 (AL,L − AL
T r[ f1AL
L,L )]
2π
−∞
where f1 and f2 are Fermi functions at the source and drain
respectively.

2.1.1 Evaluating the Green’s functions piece by piece

ρL = 2

(12)

We consider the device area in layers of N as shown in
Fig. 1. The right connected Green’s function [30] is calcu-
lated from
gL,L = (E I − HL − UL − tL,L+1 + gL+1,L+1tL+1,L )−1
(4)
where HL is the Hamiltonian of the L th layer, tL,L+1 is the
coupling matrix between adjacent layers and UL is the elec-
trostatic potential of the Lth layer. The calculation of gL,L is

2.1.3 Extracting current density
The current from ith atom to jt h atom is calculated from
(cid:90)

[7],

i, j (E )H j,i − Hi, j G n
dE Im[G n
j,i (E )]

Ii, j =

2q
h

(13)

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

3

where the electron correlation function, G n = G Σ inG † and
scattering function, Σ in = ΓS fS + ΓD fD . The source and drain
Fermi levels are at µS = 0 and µD = −qVD . To see the current
distribution in the device, we apply a small drain bias VD . Ii, j
is nonzero only if the ith atom and jt h atom are neighbors.
The total current at one atomic site can be found by adding
all the components vectorially, Ii =  ∑ j Ii, j eiΦ , where Φ is
the angle of the individual current vectors with respect to a
reference direction. As expected, the NEGF expression for
Ii, j satisfies the steady-state Kirchhoff ’s law, ∑i Ii = 0. The
terminal current IT is the sum of all currents in one atomic
layer, and should be equal to the current from the Landauer
(cid:90) ∞
formalism using the total transmission,
G(E )
q [ fS (E ) − fD (E )]dE
−∞
While the total current IT (Eq. 14) can be calculated effi-
ciently using the partial blocks in the RGFA, the spatially
resolved current density (Eq. 13), useful primarily for vi-
sualization purposes, employs the full matrix G and is thus
computationally expensive. The recursive algorithm to cal-
culate blocks of G n is described in [29]. The current density
from layer L to L + 1 is given by,

IT =

(14)

2q
L,L+1 (E ) − tL+1,LG n
Im[tL,L+1G n
IL→L+1 (E ) =
L+1,L (E )](15)
h
The matrix IL→L+1 (E ) has the size of NL × NL carrying the
atom to atom current components between the two layers.

2.2 k space formalism (KSF)

We can further cut down the problem size when the sys-
tem is periodic along the direction perpendicular to electron
transport, by employing Bloch’s theorem. The periodicity
allows us to decompose the system so that the transverse k-
points act as decoupled 1-D chains or modes, whose contri-
bution to the total current can be calculated independently.
We can thereafter calculate the conductance through bulk
graphene or graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) with mode by
mode resolution. As we shall shortly see, it also allows us to
visualize the transition from the smooth transmission pro-
file of bulk graphene to the stepwise transmission of GNRs
driven by width quantization.
Consider a graphene sheet with an applied potential vary-
ing only in the x direction (Fig. 2a). After dividing the sheet
into blocks, we can split the hamiltonian into 4 × 4 block
matrices (Hy p
) describing the interaction between the wave
i yq
j
i and yq
belonging to blocks y p
and ψ yq
functions ψ y p
j , with
i
j
subscripts denoting the rows labeled along the transverse
direction, and superscripts denoting layer columns labeled
along the transport direction (Fig. 2b). Using this pictorial
representation of the Hamiltonian, the Schr odinger equation

Fig. 2 a) Graphene sheet split into blocks that reflect its periodicity
in the y direction. b) Representation of Graphene’s hamiltonian split
into matrices describing the interaction between block’s wave func-
tions. Each box represents the interaction of the a block with itself
and each line represents the interaction of a block with a neighboring
block. c) After Fourier transforming the Graphene sheet can be split
into independent chains, one for each ky .

for the y p
i block is given by

E ψ y p
i

ψ y p
=Hy p
i y p
i
i
+ Hy p
i y p+1
i

ψ y p
+ Hy p
i y p
i+1
i+1
+ H †
ψ y p+1
y p−1
i
i

+ H †
i−1 y p
y p
i
ψ y p+1
.
i

y p
i

ψ y p
i−1

(16)

To take advantage of the manifest periodicity in y, we as-
= ψ p eiky ·yq
j , with yq
sume Bloch type solutions ψ yq
j the vec-
j
tor describing the position of the block yq
j . Substituting this
(cid:16)
(cid:17)†
solution into Eq. 16, we get
H p−1, p
ky

ψ p + H p, p+1
ky

E ψ p = H p, p
ky

ψ p+1 +

ψ p−1 ,

(17)

with

H p, p
ky

= Hy p
i y p
i

+ Hy p
i y p
i+1

eiky b + H †
y p
i−1 y p
i

e−iky b ,

H p, p+1
ky

= Hy p
i y p+1
i

,

H p−1, p
ky

= Hy p−1
i

y p
i

.

(18)

(19)

(20)

For each ky , Eq. 17 with a varying index p can be interpreted
as a one dimensional chain (Fig. 2c) decoupled from chains
with other ky s. In other words, we have split the graphene
sheet into a set of independent chains or modes. Now, we
can use the usual NEGF formalism to find the transmission
of each chain or mode (Tky ).

Tky = T r(Γ 1
ky

Gky Γ 2
ky

G †
ky

)

(21)

The quantities (Σ , Γ , G and T ) in real space are found by
inverse Fourier transform, since our Bloch assumption is

4

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

equivalent to Fourier transforming from the discrete yi -space
to ky -space. For example, the Green’s function is given by
j −y p
Gky eiky ·(yq
i ) ,

i , yq
G (y p
j ) =

(22)

1
Nk

∑
ky

with Nk , the number of points in ky space, and the ky depen-
dent Green’s function given by

(23)

Gky = [(E + iη )I − Hky − Σ1,ky − Σ2,ky ]−1
The sigma matrices are calculated as before, Σky = τ †
1 gky τ1
but the surface Green’s function is now ky dependent.
1 ]−1
gky = [αky − τ1gky τ †
(24)
where αky = E I − Hky . Hky takes care of all the couplings in
the transverse direction.
Thus the combination of semi-infinite contacts in the ±x
direction and Fourier transformation along the ±y direction
amounts to a change in basis set for the completely periodic
bulk 2D graphene. Since trace is preserved under the basis
transformation, we can calculate transmission directly in ky
space

DOS =

T r(G − G † )

i
2π

T = ∑
ky

Tky

where
G = ∑
k

Gky

(25)

(26)

The distinction between bulk graphene and GNR arises pri-
marily from the different sets of ky ’s (in practice, one needs
to worry about edge reconstruction, next nearest neighbor
interactions, strain and roughness at the edges of GNRs. For
an ideal GNR of width W = N b = Nk b the hard wall bound-
ary conditions restrict ky to the discrete set
nπ
with 0 ≤ ky b ≤ π and n integer.
W

ky =

In the case of bulk graphene we can assume periodic bound-
ary conditions every W = N b, which restrict the ky ’s to
2nπ
with − π ≤ kyb ≤ π and n integer,
ky =
W
and let N → ∞. Note that as N increases, the transmission
evolves from a stepwise curve showing width quantization
to a smooth curve.

2.3 Applying open boundary conditions

Since simulations deal with finite sized matrices, it is
important to make sure the results do not get influenced by
edge effects. While realistic physical devices do have edges,

their impact on transport is complicated, dominated by strain
and reconstruction, roughness, possible charge trapping, edge
dipoles, localized vibrons and other subtleties. In fact, mea-
surements of tilt-dependent junction resistance in graphene
show a surprisingly weak influence of edge scattering [16,
31]. For modeling purposes therefore, it is important to en-
sure that additional edge effects do not creep in simply be-
cause of the finite-sized domain of our simulation grid.
Section 2.1 deals with hard-wall boundary conditions
along the transverse direction. For such structures, elimi-
nating edge effects requires making the widths very long
(often longer than device length), which may have added
repercussions on material properties (see section 3.1). Sec-
tion 2.2 implemented periodic boundary conditions (PBC)
instead with a k-space formalism, allowing us to work with
just a couple of nearest neighbor unit cells along the trans-
verse direction, but requiring strict periodicity along that di-
rection. In this section, we will discuss how to implement
open boundary conditions (OBC) that would allow us to ir-
reversibly remove an electron impingent at the edges. The
trick is to treat the edges as virtual ‘contacts’ with self-energy
matrices built out of complex numbers, acting like energy-
dependent lossy potentials.
In this section, we will show how to generate exact open
boundary conditions (OBC) at the edges of a device. It is
worth emphasizing at this point that these are quantum bound-
ary conditions, i.e., acting on the retarded Green’s function
G . What is much harder to solve is a thermal open bound-
ary condition acting on G n , because this depends on details
of the scattering processes outside the simulation regime.
In metallurgical contacts, we impose by fiat Fermi-Dirac
distributions, but in the extended geometry just below our
simulation regime, the distribution is non-equilibrium and
the corresponding boundary conditions need to be estimated
self-consistently with the G n inside the device in order to
prevent the outside regime from sucking out the electrons
too aggressively or else inadequately.

2.3.1 The ‘scooped’ open boundary self-energy

The ‘obvious’ way to implement some kind of open bound-
ary is to attach virtual leads along the transverse direction
and extract their self-energies Σ3,4 using recursion. This is
schematically described by Fig. 3(h). While this method will
take the electrons away, the leads do not completely span the
outside regime relative to the central device represented by
the Hamiltonian [H], and the missing chunks at the corners
are expected to create spurious reflections. One could extend
the contacts Σ1,2 or Σ3,4 laterally using k space formalism to
span those corner regions, but the problem is that the four
virtual leads are ultimately decoupled from each other with
no bonds running in between, and thus do not quite represent

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

5

Fig. 3 Tracking the injected Gaussian wavepacket at different times (a-e), the wavepacket escapes due to the exact open boundary condition (g)
imposed through the self energy term. We see some reflections along the corner if we adopt a less exact (but computationally less expensive)
method to impose open boundary condition through transverse contacts (h).

a straightforward extension of the device domain beyond the
simulation regime.

unaltered.

2.3.2 Calculating self energy Σo pen

What a proper OBC will need is a geometry like Fig. 3(g),
where the virtual ‘contact’ should be a single monolithic
structure with the central device region ‘scooped’ out. The
single self-energy matrix Σo pen for this outside regime must
be reverse engineered so that the Green’s function of the
central region matches that of the infinite system periodi-
cally extended along all axes. Once we find this self energy
(section 2.3.2), we can use it for any modified condition (e.g.
a gate voltage, a molecular adsorbate or an injecting contact)
that only influences the central region but keeps the outside

To find the boundary free real-space Green’s function in
the central region, we first extract the k space version corre-
sponding to the infinite periodic system.
Gk = [(E + iη )I − Hk − Σ1,k − Σ2,k ]−1
(27)
where the k-dependent quantities are Fourier transformed
sums over nearest neighbors. From this we can calculate the
real-space Green’s function projected onto the device region
by inverse transforming
Gk exp [−ik · (Rm − Rn )]/NmNn
Gmn = ∑
k
for the atoms ‘m’ and ‘n’ spanning the central device seg-
ment. For a system with N atoms, G is N × N .

(28)

6

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

We can now reverse engineer the open boundary self-
energy, armed with this real space Green’s function and the
N × N device Hamiltonian H , giving us
Σo pen = E I − H − G −1
This self energy can be used to calculate transmission through
the structure with open boundary conditions, additional in-
jecting/removing leads Σ1,2 and any other perturbations act-
ing only on the central region through a localized potential
V that does not influence the boundaries
T = T race(ΓSGnewΓDG †
new )
Gnew = (E I − H − V − ΣS − ΣD − Σo pen )−1

(30)

(29)

2.3.3 Verifying the open boundary condition

In Fig. 3, we verify the efficiency of the open boundary
condition by launching a Gaussian wavevector with a spread
{σx , σy} and initial quasi-momentum set by the wave-vector
{kx , ky},
Ψ (x, y, t = 0) =

1
x e−(y−y0 )2 /2σ 2
e −(x−x0 )2 /2σ 2
2π√σxσy
y
× e −ikx x e−iky y
(31)
about an injection point (x0 , y0 ). We calculate the evolu-
tion of the gaussian wave-packet with time by numerically
solving the time-dependent Schr odinger equation within the
Crank Nicholson algorithm (described below), acting on the
time-dependent vector {Ψ (t )} with row entries correspond-
{Ψ (t + ∆ t )} = (cid:2)M(cid:3){Ψ (t )}
ing to the spatial coordinates
(cid:35)−1
(cid:35)(cid:34)
(cid:34)
(cid:19)
(cid:18)
(cid:1)∆ t /2
I + i(cid:0)H + Σo pen
I − i
∆ t /2
H + Σo pen
M =
(32)
In the absence of any open boundaries, the wavepacket stays
confined within the simulation domain and bounces around
(not shown). With the scooped self-energy Σo pen (Fig. 3g),
the open boundary condition takes the electron out at the
boundary (Figs. 3a-e). Note that the self-energy we used
works only at a specific energy E set by the pair (kx , ky ),
although we can extend it to all energies by Fourier trans-
forming.
Fig. 3(f) shows the results for a cross-geometry with
transverse contacts represented by Fig. 3(h). As expected,
the missing pieces along the corners give a sizeable reflec-
tion of the wavepacket.

3 NEGF simulation of electron transport in graphene

In the following sections, we will use a combination of nu-
merical techniques outlined so far to simulate current flow

through graphene segments comparable in size to experi-
mental dimensions. We show how these simulations accu-
rately capture the nuances of conductivity, conductance, mag-
netotransport, pseudospintronics and Klein tunneling within
a common, unified simulation platform.

3.1 Minimum conductivity vs conductance

One of the unique properties of graphene is that its mini-
mum conductivity σ (rather than conductance G = σW /L)
is quantized in units of 4q2 /π h, when the width to length
aspect ratio W /L is large. In other words, G is proportion-
tal to the aspect ratio W /L in wide graphene samples. The
width-dependence is expected in a large ballistic device as
the number of modes is roughly proportional to the number
of Fermi half-wavelengths one can fit into W . However, the
average transmission per mode, and thus the conductance,
is usually length-independent. This is because propagating
modes have transmissions of unity in a ballistic channel,
while evanescent tunneling modes have transmissions that
are nearly zero. However since graphene is semi-metallic,
a wide sheet supports a nearly continuum set of sub-bands
with ultralow band-gaps and tunneling probabilities that are
not ignorable. In fact the ∼ 1/ cosh2 qyL tunnel transmis-
sion terms (qy = nπ /W ) from these closely spaced modes
all add up to an overall 1/L dependence of the total trans-
mission (more precisely, a factor 2W /Lπ ) and therefore the
conductance G, leading to the conductivity quantization. Ex-
periments on dirty samples show such a quantized mini-
mum conductivity, albeit off by a factor of ∼ 3 − 4, usu-
ally attributed to Coulomb scattering from charge puddles
[32–34].
We will use the NEGF technique to extract the conduc-
tivity of graphene at the Dirac point. To recap, for large scale
graphene devices (L > 1µ m), the conductance per mode is
expected to be 4q2/h (the mode count is given by the inte-
ger part of W kF /π ), while for smaller lengths (L < 500nm)
and larger widths, the conductivity is expected to approach
4q2/(π h). We will simulate the structure shown in Fig. 4(a)
to calculate the minimum conductivity of a clean graphene
sheet. The graphene device is connected to two heavily doped
graphene contacts. As long as the contacts provide a large
number of modes and thus minimal series resistance, the de-
tails of the contact metallicity should not matter. The en-
ergy band diagram for the problem is shown in Fig. 4(b).
We model the system atomistically with RGFA as described
in section 2.1.
We use Eq. 11 to calculate the total conductance G. Min-
imum conductivity σmin = GL/W is shown in Fig. 4(c) along
with the experimental data from Ref. [33]. We take two dif-
ferent widths W = 100, 200 nm to calculate G and σmin for
various lengths (L). σmin is found to be very close to 4q2/π h.
As expected, the minimum conductivity stays close to this

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

7

Fig. 5 (a) Density of states (DOS) and conductance (inset, in units
of 2q2 /h) calculation from atomistic tight binding RGFA for two
different widths, (b) Similar calculations over a wider energy range
done with KSF, atomistic NEGF within RGFA, and an analytical in-
tegration of the E − k dispersion. Conductance (inset) is in units of
2q2 /h × 1000µ m−1 . Conductance from KSF (red line) agrees with sim-
ple linear approximation of no. of modes (black circles) at low energy.

Fig. 4 Numerical extraction of graphene minimum conductivity in the
small dimension limit (L<500nm). (a) Schematic of the device, (b)
Energy band diagram for the device with doped contacts, (c) Calculated
σmin and (d) Gmin for various aspect ratios along with experimental data
from Ref. [33].

number as long as W /L is large and a continuum evalua-
tion of the tunnel contribution is a valid approach. In the
opposite limit W (cid:28) L the conductivity increases with length
and we reach the conventional regime of conductance quan-
tization (Fig. 4(d)). Note that for a graphene ribbon of fi-
nite width, the valley degeneracy of the fundamental mode
is broken [35], so that the minimum conductance is 2q2/h.
At higher gate voltages as more modes come into play, the
conductance per mode reaches 4q2/h, with the degeneracy
of 4 coming from the presence of 2 spins and 2 valleys at the
same energy.

3.2 RGFA for finite sized graphene devices

We will now apply the RGFA technique discussed in
section II to simulate three types of finite sized graphene
based devices - uniformly doped, pn step junction and n pn
barrier junction.

3.2.1 Uniformly gated graphene

We apply RGFA to calculate the density of states (DOS)
and conductance of graphene sheets of various widths (W ).
Fig. 5(a) shows the DOS (and conductance in inset) for W =
10 and 100nm. Narrower nanoribbons show a gap as well as
Van Hove singularities due to quantization for select chiral-
ities while wider sheets show a quasi-linear bulk graphene
density of states. In practice, nanoribbons also need atten-
tion to edge state dynamics, particularly the presence of strain
and roughness [12].
A striking property of graphene is its anomalous inte-
ger quantum Hall effect. When the Fermi energy lies be-

tween two Landau levels (LL) in presence of a magnetic
field, conventional two-dimensional electron gases show a
vanishing longitudinal resistance ρxx = 0 and a quantized
Hall conductance GH = 2q2N /h where N is a non-negative
integer representing the number of filled Landau levels. In
(cid:113) ¯h
contrast, chiral quasiparticles in graphene exhibiting Berry
sign(n)(cid:112)2n, where rC =
phase show [36, 37] a Hall conductance GH = 4q2
h (N + 1/2),
with LL defined as En = ¯hvF
qB
rC
is the cyclotron radius. This non-conventional sequence can
be explained with the presence of a LL at E = 0 resulting
(cid:112)n(n − 1), where ωC is the
in a four fold degeneracy at zero carrier density (from spin
and valley degeneracy). On the contrary, Bilayer graphene
LLs are defined as, En = ¯hωC
cyclotron frequency. Now both E0 and E1 are at zero energy
producing thereby an overall eightfold degeneracy at zero
carrier density and QHE plateaus of GH = 4q2
h (N + 1) [38].
Numerical modeling magnetotransport in graphene re-
quires a minor modification to the transport scheme outlined
earlier. We replace the kinematic momentum with the quasi-
momentum k → k − qA/h, so that the plane wave terms
e−iq/h (cid:82) A·dl where A is the magnetic vector potential such
in the Bloch representation pick up an additional phase of
that ∇ × A = B. Thus the hopping parameters between atoms
(cid:34)
(cid:35)
(cid:90) n
‘m’ and ‘n’ are now given by
q
h
m
For z directed magnetic field, our guage is, A = (−By, 0, 0).
We can now turn on a magnetic field perpendicular to the
sheet, modify the hopping terms as above, and extract the
transvese (Hall) conductance as a function of varying Fermi
energy location. The Hall conductance GH = I /VH , where
I = (2q/h)N (µL − µR ) is the current, N is the number of
filled Landau levels and the Hall voltage VH = q× the differ-
ence between the electrochemical potentials of the +k and
−k edge states. These states represent skipping orbits along

tmn = t0 exp

(33)

i

A · dl

8

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

drop in electrochemical potential along the channel) is zero.

3.2.2 Single p-n junction

pn junction heterostructures in graphene act qualitatively
different from conventional pn junctions. In normal semi-
conductors, the presence of a band-gap blocks electron flow,
so that reducing (increasing) the built-in potential across a
pn junction with a drain bias leads to an exponentially in-
creased (reduced) current, creating a rectifying current-voltage
(I-V) characteristic. The lack of a bandgap removes such
rectification in graphene pn junctions (GPNJs). However,
the chiral nature of the electron flow provides fascinating
electron ‘optics’ behavior, reminiscent of Snell’s law, albeit
with some notable twists. Across a pn junction for instance,
the conservation of transverse quasi-momentum (ky ) leads
to anomalous Snell’s law
KF 1 sinθ1 = −KF 2 sinθ2
where the refractive index is set by the Fermi wavevector
and thus the gate voltage applied. The opposite sign of the
voltage across a pn junction, arising when the quasimomen-
tum component flips sign in going from conduction to va-
lence band, means that the system acts like a negative index
metamaterial.
While the electron trajectories are set by the above Snell’s
law, i.e., the conservation of transverse quasi-momentum,
the actual transmission probabilities are set by the conserva-
tion of pseudospins. The pseudospins arise from the eigen-
vectors corresponding to the photon-like graphene E-k. The
(cid:33)
(cid:32)
eigenfunctions are given by
ei(kx x + ky y)

(35)

(36)

Ψ =

1
seiθ

where θ is the 2-D angle setting the quasi-momentum k and
s = ±1 denotes the conduction or valence band (An addi-
tional sign flip with respect to kx occurs near the other val-
ley). Up and down pseudospin states are given by θ = 0
and π , corresponding to the bonding and antibonding com-
binations of the pz dimer basis sets in graphene. Analogous
to optics, we can derive the equivalent ’Fresnel equation’
for transmission probabilities, by matching the pseudospinor
components across the junction. Assuming a split distance
‘d’ between the backgates defining the pn junction, and a
(cid:34)
(cid:19) (cid:35)
voltage difference V0 between the gates, the transmission
works out to be
(cid:18) θ1 + θ2
e−π ¯hvF k2
cosθ1 cosθ2
F d sin2θ1 /V0 (37)
cos2
2
below a critical angle defined from the Snell’s law (Eq. 35),
θ1 (θ2 ) representing the incident (refracted) angle for elec-
trons. The first term shows that at normal incidence (θ1 = 0)

T (EF , θ1 ) =

Fig. 6 (a) In presence of a magnetic field, the current is carried by the
edge states that separate into +k states at the upper edge in equilibrium
with the left contact and −k states at the lower edge in equilibrium
with the right contact. (b) The Hall voltage goes through plateaus at
4q2
h (N + 1/2) for single layer and 4q2
h (N + 1) for bilayer graphene with
N a non-negative integer. Note the presence of a jump at zero energy,
which is not seen in a two-dimensional free electron gas (and arises
from a half-filled Landau level at the Dirac point), and the additional
factor of 2 in the plateau heights, arising from valley degeneracy. (c)
For a placement of the Fermi energy between two Landau levels, elec-
tron distribution function at the top and bottom edges resemble Fermi-
Dirac distributions of the corresponding contacts. Since each current
carrying state sees a constant electrochemical potential (along trans-
port direction x), the longitudinal resistance vanishes.

the edges created by the cyclotron orbits in the bulk, and
are separately in equilibrium with the left and right contact
Fermi energies.
Fig. 6b shows the calculated Hall conductance yielding a
series of plateaus for both single layer and bilayer graphene.
Fig. 6c shows the local carrier distribution functions f (±k)
obtained from the ratio of the local carrier density and the
local density of states, in other words, the ratio

L,L (l , l )/i(GL,L (l , l ) − GL,L (l , l ))
f (E ) = G n

(34)

where l is the index for an atom belonging to either top or
bottom edge. The Hall voltage turns out to be VH = q(µL −
µR ) (Fig. 6c) giving conductance plateaus for GH . The elec-
trochemical potentials (µL , µR ) don’t change along transport
direction x so that the longitudinal resistance (given by the

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

9

Fig. 7 Numerical calculation (NEGF) of a single pn junction conductance for both abrupt and smooth GPNJ. (a-b) Variation of total resistance
with dopings in the two regions for abrupt (a) and smooth junction (c) Resistance as a function of Fermi energy (EF ) for a fixed built in potential
V0 = 0.2eV. The red (abrupt) and black (smooth junction) lines are resistance plots along the corresponding black and red lines in (a) and (b).
Conductance (inset) which can be viewed as G = G0MTav where Tav , pinches off at two points - one due to vanishing M and at another one
due to vanishing Tav , average transmission per mode. (d) The resistance asymmetry between pn and nn regime from plots along specific doping
(∆ E1 lines from (b). (e) Extraction of Tav numerically. The transmission of a symmetric GPNJ is 2/3 (at EF = 0), which results in asymmetric
conductance vs doping in GPNJ. The solid lines are from NEGF and the circles are from analytical calculation, Eq. 37. (f) Junction resistance (Eq.
40) enhancement due to a tilt in the junction with respect to the tilt. This time we vary the doping along the diagonal (orange line in (b)) as done
in the experiment [31].

the transmission function is unity regardless of the size of
the barrier V0 . The absence of normal reflection is a manifes-
tation of Klein tunneling, and arises because backscattering
requires the flipping of pseudospins, in other words, a fast
spatially varying potential. The second, exponential factor
(drops out for unipolar n+n or p+ p junctions) in the trans-
mission equation comes from tunneling across the slowly
varying junction, where the transverse modes face a momentum-
dependent band-gap, reminiscent of cut-off frequencies in a
wave-guide.
The overall conductance of a GPNJ can be calculated
by summing over all transmissions, G = G0 ∑M
θ T (θ ), which
can be thought of as the total number of modes times an
average transmission. Thus the average transmission over
all modes at a particular energy is given by Tav = G/G0M ,
where number of modes, M = 4EF W /π ¯hvF . From RGFA
calculation, we get the total conductance G = T r(Γ1G Γ2G † )
in units of G0 = 2q2 /h.
Figs. 7 (a,b) show the doping-dependent resistance of
a GPNJ for a 100nm wide graphene sheet, for abrupt and
slowly varying junctions respectively. In fig. 7, we plot the
variables against the shifts in the Dirac point in both regions,
i.e. ∆ E1 and ∆ E2 . The resistances at the upper left and lower
right corners of the plot are higher than the other two ( pn vs
uniformly doped), resulting in an asymmetric resistance vs
doping in fig. 7(d) (plotted for specific doping values ∆ E1
as indicated with horizontal lines in 7(b)).

The WKB term in Eq. 37 is only present in the pn junc-
tion regime, and that is why only the pn junction resistance
is affected while going from abrupt to smooth junctions (a-
b). For a p p or nn junction the Fermi energy does not cross
the smoothly varying Dirac point anywhere in the device and
the transmission expression only includes the wave-function
mismatch term. Fig. 7(c) shows the resistance variation for
a fixed built-in potential V0 = ∆ E1 − ∆ E2 (along black and
red lines in fig. 7(a) and (b)). In the conductance variation
(inset), we see effectively two Dirac points, which has a sim-
ple physical explanation. Recall that the normalized conduc-
tance can be decoupled into the mode count from one end
times the average transmission over to the other side

G/G0 = M1T12 = M2T21

(38)

The left conductance minimum at EF = −0.1eV is where
M1 becomes zero, while the right one at EF = +0.1eV is
where the average transmission for all modes, T12 , becomes
zero. To make this clear, we calculate Tav numerically (Fig.
7(e)), clearly showing a vanishing transmission at the second
Dirac point. To calculate Tav , we first simulate a graphene
device with uniform doping and extract the overall mode
count from the ballistic conductance (G1 = MG0 ). We then
simulate the device with different dopings (finite built-in po-
tential, V0 , and conductance G2 = G0MTav ). The ratio of
G2 (EF ) and G1 (EF ) at each energy gives us Tav (EF ). For

10

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

=

=

M (E )

dθ

W kF
2π

cos2θ
∆ ky

kF cosθ dθ =

Fig. 8 Tracking electron trajectories in GPNJ, negative index makes the refraction angle negative - resulting in spatial focusing of current flow
for equal dopings (left column). Right column shows total internal reflection when the refracted side has lower doping, thus reflecting electrons
outside the critical angle.
(cid:90) π /2
example, for a symmetric GPNJ (at EF = 0), we have
T (θ )
T (θ ) ≈
G/G0 = ∑
(cid:90) π /2
(cid:90) π /2
∆ θ
−π /2
θ
−π /2
−π /2
2
3
leading to Tav = 2/3, which is close to what we get in the
numerical calculation. Thus the conductance of a symmet-
ric GPNJ is 2/3 of the uniformly doped graphene sheet with
the same Fermi energy (EF ). In Fig. 7(e) we also show the
analytical calculation of Tav (circles) in the same manner as
done above but this time using the transmission in Eq. 37.
The analytical calculation matches very closely with the nu-
merical calculation (solid lines).
A more direct evidence of chiral tunneling is seen from
the resistance across a tilted junction. We use the follow-
ing equation to extract the junction resistance [7], that elim-
inates the quantized resistance from the contacts.
1 − Tav
4q2
h )−1 [
MTav
We calculate M and Tav numerically from NEGF as dis-
cribed earlier. Fig. 7f shows the variation of RJ plotted against
∆ E1 (along orange line) for a 100nm wide graphene sheet.
For low carrier density in the middle, the background dop-
ing (n0 ) makes the device an n+n or p+ p junction and RJ is
low. For n1,2 > n0 , i.e., in the wings of the plot, the device
reaches the p − n junction regime and RJ becomes high. This
characteristic doping dependence of junction resistance has

been seen in experiments in the past [39, 40], usually cap-
tured by the odd resistance, 2Rod d = R(n1 , n2 ) − R(n1 , −n2 ).
The chiral tunneling can be seen more directly by varying
the tilt angle, as seen in experiments recently [16]. The pur-
ple squares show the trend for a tilted GPNJ, where a pro-
nounced peak is seen in RJ . With increasing tilt between the
junction and the transport axis normal to the contacts, the
incident angless of the incoming modes are effectively in-
creased, leading to higher resistance. Such an increase in
junction resistance is seen in a recent experiment [31] and a
detailed theoretical treatement can be found in [16]. Interest-
ingly, the results suggest the absence of specular reflection
from the edges of the graphene sample.
We will next apply the current density formalism in RGFA
to show the electron trajectories inside the GPNJ device.
The total current at an atomic site is equal to vector sum
of all current components to nearest neighbor atoms (from
Eq. 15). The classical ray tracing analysis from Snell’s law is
shown in Fig. 8(a). For equal dopings on both sides (kF 2 =
kF 1 ), the angle of refraction is exactly equal (with a neg-
ative sign) to the incident angle. As a result, a group of
electrons originating from a point contact focus back to one
point on the refracted side [6]. Fig. 8(b) shows the trajec-
tories when the doping at the refracted side is smaller than
that at the incident side (kF 2 < kF 1 ) making the critical an-
gle smaller than π /2. The geometrical ‘optics’ trajectories
corresponding to electron focusing and total internal reflec-
tion are reproduced by the calculated current density with-
ing an atomistic RGFA simulation, shown in Fig. 8(c), (d).
A small source contact (10nm wide) is placed 50nm to the
left of the pn junction, and electrons are injected with a

RJ = (

]

cos3θ dθ

(39)

(40)

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

11

; Ohmic pl at eaus

(41)

small drain bias (VD = 0.08 V) around a Fermi energy. When
the gates are biased symmetrically around the junction, al-
though the electrons see a voltage bias along the drain that
spans the entire device width, the pn junction Hamiltonian
and associated pseudospin conservation causes the electrons
to focus to a small point at the drain. For an n+p junction,
the electrons incident above the critical angle are unable to
preserve their transverse quasi-momentum and reflect back,
while those within critical angle tunnel to the opposite band
on the other side.
We now investigate the quantum Hall plateaus for a sin-
gle pn junction. According to recent experiment [41], the
conductance in the pn junction regime follows the Ohmic
conductance rule
νnν p
G(q2/h) =
νn + ν p
νn and ν p are the filling factors in the two segments of the
device. This was explained by Abanin et. al. [42] in terms
of mode mixing at the p − n interface for large systems with
it produces pn junction plateaus as (cid:8)1, 3
2 , ...et c.(cid:9) for filling
diffusive transport. As graphene filling factors are {2, 6, 10, ...},
factor combinations of (2, 2), (2, 6) etc. matching closely
with the experiment [41].
This result changes considerably for coherent ballistic
transport for smaller structures. Tworzydlo et. al. [43] showed
that for armchair nanoribbons the conductance plateaus be-
come
1
G0 (1 − cosΦ ); Bal l ist ic pl at eaus
2
independent of individual filling factors νn , ν p . G0 = 2q2/h
is the lowest Hall plateau for graphene. Φ is the angle be-
tween valley isospins at the top and bottom edges and de-
pends on the chirality of the nanoribbon. Depending on the
number of hexagons N along transverse direction, Φ = π for
(cid:26) 2
N = 3M + 1 and Φ = π /3 otherwise. This leads to
1
2
The ballistic to ohmic cross over for the plateaus can be re-
covered by using interface and edge disorder [44].
The magnetotransport for zigzag ribbons cannot be ex-
plained with valley isospin arguments. Akhmerov et. al. [45]
proposed the theory of valley valve effect with intervalley
scattering which leads to complete suppression of conduc-
tance in the zigzag pn junction, if the number of atoms across
(cid:26) 0
the ribbon is even.
2

i f N = 3M+1
otherwise

i f N = 2M
otherwise

G(q2/h) =

(42)

(43)

(44)

G =

G(q2/h) =

Impact of depletion width d (spacing between two gates)
on GPNJ ballistic magneto-conductance for both armchair
and zigzag ribbons are shown in Fig. 9. Magnetic field B

Fig. 9 Magnetotransport in graphene pn junction. Magnetic field,
B=10T and filling factors are νn = ν p = 6. (Left) Change of conduc-
tance with depletion width, d for Armchair ribbons. For high depletion
width, we get the expected plateaus of 2 and 1
2 . (Right) Plateaus of 0
and 2 for Zigzag ribbons. Dotted horizontal lines show analytical pre-
dictions.

Fig. 10 Physics of n pn junction. (a) Band diagram. The black line
shows the change of Dirac point as a result of different dopings at dif-
ferent portions of the device. Blue (red) region in the E-k indicates
empty (filled) states. (b) Electron trajectories in such junctions, mul-
tiple focusing takes place, (c) Ballistic conductance as a function of
Fermi energy for a fixed barrier height for different barrier width, D=5,
25 and 100nm (black, red and blue) . Width of the device is W = 50nm.
The solid lines are from numerical NEGF calculation, while the cir-
cles are from analytical calculation, Eq. 45. (d) Experimental data from
Ref. [46]. Conductance in the experiment is much lower due to scatter-
ing mechanisms.

= 10T and dopings are ∆ E1 = ∆ E2 = 0.15eV producing
νn = ν p = 6. Conductance values approach analytically pre-
dicted numbers only when the depletion width is sufficiently
large (> 30nm), filtering out higher Landau Levels (LL)
[44]. It requires larger depletion width as individual filling
factors get higher. In most cases, the lower plateaus ( 1
2 and
0 for armchair and zigzag respectively) are more difficult to

12

achieve than the higher one (2).

3.2.3 n-p-n junction

By applying a step like potential, we can realize an n pn
junction. The dopings can be done by either a combination
of global back gate and top gate [40] or by selective chemi-
cal doping. In fig. 10(a), we show the energy band diagram
for the device. We consider both junctions as abrupt, d = 0,
while the extent of the p type barrier region is D. In fig.
10(c), we show an NEGF calculation of the npn conductance
for various D values. For larger D, two Dirac points are ev-
ident from the pinched off conductance, but for smaller Ds
we see a considerable tunneling around the second Dirac
point (EF = 0.5eV), where the critical angle for the incident
electrons is supposed to be very small. The first dip happens
at the Dirac point of the incident n region where M1 = 0 as
before, while the second corresponds to the electrons in the
n region aligned with the Dirac point of the barrier p region
and the transmission T12 is small. In a single p − n junc-
tion, the modes with higher angles than the critical angle
reflect back as they do not have any propagating states to
tunnel into while preserving their transverse quasimomen-
tum. But in the n pn junction case, the length of the forbid-
den region D is finite, and the electrons even while aligned
with the Dirac point of the central p region can still preserve
their quasi-momenta by tunneling to the other side. This in-
creased conductance has been seen experimentally [46] in
the past (Fig. 10). In the limit when D is very large, we
approach the single p − n junction case we worked out in
Fig. 7(c) inset. And when D is very small, we approach the
uniform doping (n doped here) case through significant tun-
neling. Note that we also see oscillations for n pn junctions,
which originate from the Fabry Perot cavity formed by the
electrostatic barrier [46, 47]. Both the tunneling and the res-
onant oscillations can be captured analytically by matching
eigenvector components across the pnp junction, as worked
out in Ref. [5].

r =

2ieiφ sin(qxD) × (sinφ − ss(cid:48) sinθ )
ss(cid:48) [e−iqxD cos(φ + θ ) + eiqxD cos(φ − θ )] − 2isin(qxD)
(45)

(cid:113)
giving us a transmission, T (φ ) = 1 − R = 1 − r2 . qx is the
F ) − k2
(EF − V0 )2 /( ¯h2 v2
wave vector inside the barrier, qx =
y ,
θ = t an−1 (ky/qx ) and s = signEF and s(cid:48) = sign(EF − V0 ).
We then sum over different modes, set by the width of the
graphene sheet, to get the total conductance G(EF ) in units
of G0 = 2q2 /h (Fig. 10 (c), ,circles), in excellent agreement
with the NEGF atomistic calculation and qualitatively with

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

Fig. 11 Angle resolved transmission in single layer and bilayer
graphene for a fixed Fermi energy and for various built-in potential
V0 . At left (EF = 0.5eV), Klein tunneling with maximum transmission
at normal incidence. At right (EF = 0.05eV), Klein reflection in bi-
layer graphene for normal incidence. Top pannel shows the forward
and backward moving branches colored according to the pseudospin
texture for normal incidence.

experiments (Fig. 10)).

3.3 KSF to simulate bulk graphene and GPNJ

The inset in Fig. 5(b) shows the calculated conductance
of bulk graphene from KSF. Note that the peaks due to finite
width quantization in Fig. 5 are removed by the application
of periodic boundary conditions. The black circles show the
trend that is expected from a linear approximation of the
number of modes M = 2W EF /π ¯hvF at low energy. The
main figure in Fig. 5(b) shows the bulk graphene density
of states calculated from three methods. The red line shows
the result from an atomistic NEGF calculation. The black
circles are from an analytical formula [48], while the blue
line is from a numerical extraction of the density of states
(DOS) from the graphene E − K relation. All three calcula-
tions match very well with one another.

KSF approach also allows us to show the angle (mode)
dependent chiral tunneling in graphene. We use Eq. 21 to
get Tky which is converted into a polar plot (Fig. 11) using
θ = sin−1 ky
, for transmission per spin per valley. For single
kF
layer graphene the transmission becomes unity for normal
incidence (known as Klein tunneling). On the contrary, for
bilayer graphene, the reflection becomes unity (Klein reflec-
tion). The tranmission ultimately depends on how well the
wave-functions match on both sides of the junction (branches
with same pseudospin components have same color in Fig.

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

13

periodic boundary condition. Similarly we use αky to calcu-
late gky as described in section II. The Tav vs d is shown in
inset of Fig. 12 with d extended in the micron regime.

4 Conclusions - the role of numerical simulation

Graphene and its heterojunctions constitute a fascinat-
ing system that demonstrate rich physics such as anoma-
lous quantum Hall, chiral tunneling, metamaterial behavior
and pseudospintronics. Extended to other sub-systems such
as bilayer graphene, this richness proliferates with Lifschitz
transitions, anti-Klein tunneling, more anomalous Hall sig-
natures and so on. The simplicity of the low-energy 2-D
bandstructures of graphene and its progeny allows pen and
paper demonstration of these physical concepts. The NEGF
approach provides a common computational framework to
verify these concepts atomistically, whereby a small modi-
fication to the Hamiltonian (e.g. a barrier or a field-induced
phase in the coupling parameter) can manifest these physical
concepts with very little effort, even in tougher geometries
such as multiple junctions and tilted heterostructures. When
comparing with experiments, however, one needs to worry
about the sensitivity of these effects to scattering, edge states,
quantization, smooth junctions, strain, roughness and so on.
This is where computation plays a definitive role. It was
hard to anticipate a-priori what the effect of specular edge
scattering would be on the resistance of a tilted junction,
but we now know through numerical simulations [16] that
it creates a sweet-spot in the scattering profile that experi-
ments do not show. Such ‘smoking-gun’ demonstrations al-
low us to judge the feasibility of devices that utilize uncon-
ventional electronic switching in graphene, such as the cre-
ation of transmission gaps with subthermal switching [15].
We can now atomistically simulate graphene systems whose
sizes are comparable to experimental dimensions, and di-
rectly demonstrate many of the physical effects that such
devices are based on in presence of non-idealities. Further
extensions will involve the role of self-consistent screening
(Poisson), charge puddles, defects and incoherent scattering
from remote optical phonons.

Acknowledgements The authors acknowledge financial support from
INDEX-NRI. Redwan Sajjad would like to thank Khairul Alam and
Golam Rabbani for the assistance in implementing RGFA. Authors
also thank Eugene Kolomeisky, Branislav Nikolic, Farzad Mahfouzi
for useful discussions.

References

1. K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang,
S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, “Electric field
effect in atomically thin carbon films,” Science, vol. 306, no. 5696,
pp. 666–669, 2004.
2. S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin,
D. C. Elias, J. A. Jaszczak, and A. K. Geim, “Giant intrinsic carrier

Fig. 12 KSF-RGFA simulation of smooth GPNJ. (a) Conductance
characteristics as a function of Fermi energy for a fixed built-in poten-
tial V0 = 0.6eV, conductance is suppressed in the pn junction regime
due to the exponentially decaying transmission of higher order modes.
Inset: Average transmission per mode Tav for a symmetric GPNJ (EF =
0 point in (a)) vs the separation between two gates.

11).

3.4 Combining KSF and RGFA

We now combine the two transport formalisms KSF and
RGFA to a graphene p − n junction and show how this method
allows us to simulate very long, micron-sized devices with
periodic boundary conditions along the transverse direction.
We apply this technique to numerically reproduce the tun-
nel transmission across a GPNJ with split gates, which re-
quires simulating a long device to extract the proper de-
cay constant. We assume that the Dirac point varies linearly
across the junction for simplicity (Fig. 7(a)) In presence of
a slowly varying potential across the GPNJ, the transverse
modes with finite wave-vector ky act like waveguides with
a cut-off frequency and thus need to overcome a real tunnel
barrier. A smooth GPNJ thus selectively transmits the low
angle electrons [49], with suppression of the higher angle
modes with increasing length of the junction transition re-
gion. The fundamental normal mode still does not see a bar-
rier and thus transmits perfectly, reflection once again elim-
inated by a pseudospin dominated selection rule, retaining
the Klein tunneling properties of GPNJ.
The conductance of a symmetric (equal and opposite
doping on both sides) smooth GPNJ, using the expression
(cid:114) kF
(cid:90) θ0
from Eq. 37, becomes
G ≈ 4q2
e−π kF dθ 2 ≈ 4q2
dθ
W
(46)
∆ θ
π h
−θ0
h
d
where θ0 = (π kF d )−1 is the effective critical angle imposed
by the smooth junction [49] and ∆ θ = ∆ ky/(kcosθ ) is the
angular separation between adjacent modes. Numerically cap-
turing this exponential decrease in conductance with gate
split distance d requires simulating a long device. The defi-
nitions of the unit cell Hamiltonian are now changed by the
following.
L,L+1 e−ika
HL,k = HL + tL,L+1 eika + t †
where tL,L+1 is the layer to layer coupling matrix in the trans-
verse direction. This will describe a layer Hamiltonian with

(47)

14

Redwan N. Sajjad et al.

Cam-

mobilities in graphene and its bilayer,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 100,
no. 1, p. 016602, Jan 2008.
3. K. Bolotin, K. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone,
P. Kim, and H. Stormer, “Ultrahigh electron mobility in suspended
graphene,” Solid State Communications, vol. 146, no. 9-10, pp.
351 – 355, 2008.
4. J. C. Slonczewski and P. R. Weiss, “Band structure of graphite,”
Phys. Rev., vol. 109, pp. 272–279, 1958.
5. M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov, and A. K. Geim, “Chiral tun-
nelling and the klein paradox in graphene,” Nat Phys, vol. 2, no. 9,
pp. 620–625, 2006.
6. V. V. Cheianov, V. Fal’ko, and B. L. Altshuler, “The Focusing of
Electron Flow and a Veselago Lens in Graphene p-n Junctions,”
Science, vol. 315, no. 5816, pp. 1252–1255, 2007.
7. S. Datta, Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems.
bridge University Press, 1997.
8. P. Damle, A. Ghosh, and S. Datta, “Unified description of molec-
ular conduction: From molecules to metallic wires,” Physical
Review B, vol. 64, no. 20, p. 201403, 2001.
9. J. Guo, S. Datta, M. Anantram, and M. Lundstrom, “Atomistic
simulation of carbon nanotube field-effect transistors using non-
equilibrium greens function formalism,” Journal of Computational
Electronics, vol. 3, pp. 373–377, 2004.
10. S. Koswatta, S. Hasan, M. Lundstrom, M. Anantram, and
D. Nikonov, “Nonequilibrium green’s function treatment of
phonon scattering in carbon-nanotube transistors,” Electron
Devices, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 2339 –2351,
sept. 2007.
11. Y. Ouyang, Y. Yoon, and J. Guo, “Scaling behaviors of graphene
nanoribbon fets: A three-dimensional quantum simulation study,”
Electron Devices, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 2223
–2231, sept. 2007.
12. F. Tseng, D. Unluer, K. Holcomb, M. R. Stan, and A. W. Ghosh,
“Diluted chirality dependence in edge rough graphene nanoribbon
field-effect transistors,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 94, no. 22,
p. 223112, 2009.
13. T. Low, S. Hong, J. Appenzeller, S. Datta, and M. Lundstrom,
“Conductance asymmetry of graphene p-n junction,” Electron
Devices, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1292 –1299,
2009.
14. J. R. Williams, T. Low, M. Lundstrom, and C. Marcus, “Gate-
controlled guiding of electrons in graphene,” Nat Nano, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 222–225, 2011.
15. R. N. Sajjad and A. W. Ghosh, “High efficiency switching us-
ing graphene based electron ”optics”,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 99,
no. 12, p. 123101, 2011.
16. R. Sajjad, S. Sutar, J. U. Lee, and A. Ghosh, “Manifestation of
chiral tunneling at a tilted graphene pn junction,” Phys. Rev. B,
vol. 86, p. 155412, 2012.
17. J. Wang, E. Polizzi, and M. Lundstrom, “A three-dimensional
quantum simulation of silicon nanowire transistors with the
effective-mass approximation,” Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 96, no. 4, pp. 2192–2203, 2004.
18. M. Bescond, K. Nehari, J. Autran, N. Cavassilas, D. Munteanu,
and M. Lannoo, “3d quantum modeling and simulation of
multiple-gate nanowire mosfets,” in Electron Devices Meeting,
2004. IEDM Technical Digest. IEEE International, dec. 2004, pp.
617 – 620.
19. M. Luisier, A. Schenk, W. Fichtner, and G. Klimeck, “Atomistic
simulation of nanowires in the s p3 d 5 s∗ tight-binding formalism:
From boundary conditions to strain calculations,” Phys. Rev. B,
vol. 74, p. 205323, 2006.
20. K. Nehari, N. Cavassilas, F. Michelini, M. Bescond, J. L. Au-
tran, and M. Lannoo, “Full-band study of current across silicon
nanowire transistors,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 90, no. 13, p.
132112, 2007.

21. M. Shin, “Quantum simulation of device characteristics of sili-
con nanowire fets,” Nanotechnology, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 230 –237, march 2007.
22. R. N. Sajjad, K. Alam, and Q. Khosru, “Parametrization of a sil-
icon nanowire effective mass model from sp3d5s* orbital basis
calculations,” Semiconductor Science and Technology, vol. 24, p.
045023, 2009.
23. A. R. Rocha, V. M. Garcia-suarez, S. W. Bailey, C. J. Lambert,
J. Ferrer, and S. Sanvito, “Towards molecular spintronics,” Nat
Mater, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 335–339, 2005.
24. S. Salahuddin and S. Datta, “Self-consistent simulation of hybrid
spintronic devices,” in Electron Devices Meeting, 2006. IEDM
’06. International, dec. 2006, pp. 1 –4.
25. N. Mingo and L. Yang, “Phonon transport in nanowires coated
with an amorphous material: An atomistic green’s function ap-
proach,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 68, p. 245406, 2003.
26. N. Mingo, “Anharmonic phonon flow through molecular-sized
junctions,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 74, p. 125402, 2006.
27. X. Wang, Y. Ouyang, X. Li, H. Wang, J. Guo, and H. Dai, “Room-
temperature all-semiconducting sub-10-nm graphene nanoribbon
field-effect transistors,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 100, no. 20, p.
206803, May 2008.
28. M. Galperin, S. Toledo, and A. Nitzan, “Numerical computation
of tunneling fluxes,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 117,
no. 23, pp. 10 817–10 826, 2002.
29. A. Svizhenko, M. P. Anantram, T. R. Govindan, B. Biegel, and
R. Venugopal, “Two-dimensional quantum mechanical modeling
of nanotransistors,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 91, no. 4, pp.
2343–2354, 2002.
30. R. Lake, G. Klimeck, R. C. Bowen, and D. Jovanovic, “Single and
multiband modeling of quantum electron transport through lay-
ered semiconductor devices,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 81,
no. 12, pp. 7845–7869, 1997.
31. S. Sutar, E. S. Comfort, J. Liu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, and
J. U. Lee, “Angle-dependent carrier transmission in graphene pn
junctions,” Nano Letters, vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 4460–4464, 2012.
32. Y.-W. Tan, Y. Zhang, K. Bolotin, Y. Zhao, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang,
S. Das Sarma, H. L. Stormer, and P. Kim, “Measurement of scat-
tering rate and minimum conductivity in graphene,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 99, p. 246803, 2007.
33. F. Miao, S. Wijeratne, Y. Zhang, U. C. Coskun, W. Bao, and C. N.
Lau, “Phase-coherent transport in graphene quantum billiards,”
Science, vol. 317, no. 5844, pp. 1530–1533, 2007.
34. J.-H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Adam, M. S. Fuhrer, E. D. Williams, and
M. Ishigami, “Charged impurity scattering in graphene,” Nat Phys,
vol. 4, pp. 377–381, 2008.
35. J. Tworzydło, B. Trauzettel, M. Titov, A. Rycerz, and C. W. J.
Beenakker, “Sub-poissonian shot noise in graphene,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 96, p. 246802, 2006.
36. K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Kat-
snelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos, and A. A. Firsov, “Two-
dimensional gas of massless dirac fermions in graphene,” Nature,
vol. 438, no. 7065, pp. 197–200, 2005.
37. Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer, and P. Kim, “Experimen-
tal observation of the quantum hall effect and berry’s phase in
graphene,” Nature, vol. 438, no. 7065, pp. 201–204, 2005.
38. E. Mccann and V. I. Fal’ko, “Landau-Level Degeneracy and Quan-
tum Hall Effect in a Graphite Bilayer,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, p.
086805, Mar 2006.
39. B. Huard et al., “Transport measurements across a tunable po-
tential barrier in graphene,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 98, no. 23, p.
236803, Jun 2007.
40. N. Stander, B. Huard, and D. Goldhaber-Gordon, “Evidence for
klein tunneling in graphene p-n junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol.
102, p. 026807, Jan 2009.
41. J. R. Williams, L. DiCarlo, and C. M. Marcus, “Quantum hall ef-
fect in a gate-controlled p-n junction of graphene,” Science, vol.
317, no. 5838, pp. 638–641, 2007.

Atomistic Non-equilibrium Green’s function simulation of graphene based heterojunctions

15

42. D. A. Abanin and L. S. Levitov, “Quantized transport in graphene
p-n junctions in a magnetic field,” Science, vol. 317, no. 5838, p.
641, 2007.
43. J. Tworzydło, I. Snyman, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J.
Beenakker, “Valley-isospin dependence of the quantum hall ef-
fect in a graphene p-n junction,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 76, p. 035411,
2007.
44. T. Low, “Ballistic-ohmic quantum hall plateau transition in a
graphene p-n junction,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 80, p. 205423, 2009.
45. A. R. Akhmerov, J. H. Bardarson, A. Rycerz, and C. W. J.
Beenakker, “Theory of
in graphene
the valley-valve effect
nanoribbons,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 77, p. 205416, 2008.
46. B. Ozyilmaz, P. Jarillo-Herrero, D. Efetov, D. A. Abanin, L. S.
Levitov, and P. Kim, “Electronic transport and quantum hall effect
in bipolar graphene p-n- p junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 99, p.
166804, 2007.
47. A. F. Young and P. Kim, “Quantum interference and klein tun-
nelling in graphene heterojunctions,” Nat Phys, vol. 5, no. 3, pp.
222–226, 2009.
48. A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, and
A. K. Geim, “The electronic properties of graphene,” Rev. Mod.
Phys., vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 109–162, Jan 2009.
49. V. V. Cheianov and V. I. Fal’ko, “Selective transmission of dirac
electrons and ballistic magnetoresistance of n − p junctions in
graphene,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 74, p. 041403, Jul 2006.

