Vacuum nanogap formation in multilayer structures by an adhesion-controlled 
process 

 

Z. Taliashvilia, A. Tavkhelidzeb*, L. Jangidzea, Y. Blagidzec 

 

a Tbilisi State University, Chavchavadze Ave. 13, 0179 Tbilisi, Georgia 

b Ilia State University, Cholokashvili Ave. 3/5, 0162 Tbilisi, Georgia 

c Institute of Cybernetics, S. Euli St. 5, 0186 Tbilisi, Georgia 

*E-mail address: avtotav@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

In  this  study,  we  regulate  adhesion  between  thin  metal  films  to  produce  a  large-area  vacuum  nanogap  for  electron  tunneling. 
Multilayer structures comprising thin metal films with adjustable adhesion were fabricated. The Cu/Ag/Ti/Si structures were grown on 
Si  substrates  and  include  thin  Ti  and  Ag  films  and  a  thick  Cu  layer.  The  Ag  and  Ti  films  were  deposited  on  the  Si  substrate  under 
vacuum,  and  a  thick  Cu  layer was  subsequently  electroplated  onto  the  Ag  surface.  Later,  the  sandwich was  separated  and  a  vacuum 
nanogap was  opened  to produce  two Ag/Cu  and Ti/Si  conformal  electrodes. The  adhesion  strength between  the Ti  and Ag  films was 
precisely  adjusted  by  exposing  the  structures  to  dry  O2  after  Ti  growth  but  before  Ag  growth.  The  resulting  adhesion  needed  to  be 
sufficiently high to allow electroplating of Cu and sufficiently low to allow subsequent separation.  Either heating or cooling was used 
to  separate  the  sandwiches.  T  he  structures  separated  as  a  result  of  the  different  thermal  expansion  parameters  of  the  Si  and  Cu 
electrodes and the low adhesion between the Ti and Ag  layers. After separation, the Ag and Ti surfaces were analyzed optically using 
a Michelson  interferometer. Adhesion  regulation  and  optimization  of  the  electroplating  regime  allowed  fabrication  of  two  conformal 
electrodes  with  a  nanogap  smaller  than  5  nm  and  an  area  larger  than  7  mm2.  Such  electrodes  can  be  used  for  efficient  energy 
conversion and cooling in the mixed thermionic and thermotunneling regime. 

Keywords: nanogap; adhesion; electroplating; tunneling; thermoelectric; thermotunnel. 

 

1. Introduction  

       In  recent  years,  micro-coolers  and  energy  converters 
based on  electron  tunneling  have  been  investigated  [1 –6]. The 
earlier  study  of  cooling  by  electron  tunneling  was  conducted 
to  prevent  overheating  in  single-electron  transistors  [1].  A 
typical  metal-insulator-metal  (MIM)  tunnel  junction  has  high 
heat  conductivity  as  a  result  of  its  low  insulator  thickness, 
which  is  in  the  range  of  3 −10  nm.  This  creates  para sitic  heat 
backflow, which  decreases  the  cooling  coefficient  of  an MIM 
junction. A metal-vacuum-metal  (MVM)  junction  is  free  from 
this  drawback  but  is  notably  complex  and  difficult  to  realize 
practically.  However,  a  conformal  electrode  method  based  on 
the  electroplating  of  a  top  electrode  has  been  proposed  [2]. 
Coolers  utilizing  vacuum  nanogaps  have  been  studied  in  a 
number  of  earlier  publications  [3–7].  It  has  been  s hown  that 
the  cooling  power  of MVM  junctions  is  high,  on  the  order  of 
100  W/cm2  [3,  5].  However,  the  cooling  coefficient  of  such 
junctions  does  not  exceed  10%.  A  metal-vacuum-insulator-
metal  (MVIM)  tunnel  junction with an  additional thin layer of 

 

1 

insulator  coating  has  also  been  studied  [6].  It  was  found  that 
the cooling coefficient of this MVIM junction was higher (40 –
50%)  than  that  of  an  MVM  junction,  and,  additionally,  the 
insulating  layer  protects  the  electrodes  against  the  possibility 
of  a  short  circuit  and  simplifies  the  design.  Composite 
electrode materials were also studied from the point of view of 
maximizing thermionic emission and thermotunneling [8]. The 
practical  realization of energy converters and coolers based on 
thermotunneling  has  been  discussed  in  the  literature  [9 –16]. 
Multilayer  structures  allowing  the  formation  of  vacuum 
nanogaps on a large scale has been reported in reference [17]. 
The objective of this work is to develop a method that 
allows  precise  regulation  of  the  adhesion  between  Ti  and  Ag 
films in Cu/Ag/Ti/Si multilayer structures. This adhesion must 
be  sufficiently  high  to  allow  the  electroplating  of  Cu  and 
sufficiently  low  to  allow  the  subsequent  separation  (i.e., 
separation  of  the  electrodes  without  the  need  for  a  solid 
barrier)  without  significant  deformation  of  the  Ag/Cu  and 
Ti/Si  bulk  electrodes.  The  matching  between 
the 
two 
conformal  electrodes  should  be  accurate  enough  to  allow 

electron  tunneling  in  the  MVM  junction  formed  between  the 
electrodes.   
 

2. Experimental details 

2.1 Sandwich growth  
  
Cu/Ag/Ti/Si  structures  were  grown  on  a  Si  substrate 
and  include  thin  films  of Ti  and Ag  and  a  thick Cu  layer. The 
Ag  and  Ti  films  were  deposited  on  a  Si  substrate  under 
vacuum and the thick Cu layer was subsequently electroplated. 
We used n-type Si (100) double-sided polished substrates with 
diameters  of  50  mm,  40  mm,  and  20  mm,  thicknesses  in  the 
range of 1 –2 mm  and  surface  roughnesses of  less  tha n 0.5  nm 
as  the  base  electrodes.  The  Cu/Ag/Ti/Si  sandwiches  were 
fabricated according to the following steps:  
(i)  A  Si  substrate  was  exposed  to  a  chemical  treatment 
procedure  consisting  of wet  cleaning  in dimethylformamide  at 
T=325  K  for  3  minutes;  wet  cleaning  in  a  mixture  of  HF  and 
H2O  (1:25,  volume  fraction)  for  30  seconds;  plasma  cleaning 
in  a  vacuum  chamber  using  an  O2  plasma  (at  an  O2    pressure 
of  13  Pa)  for  20 minutes,  followed  by  an Ar  plasma  (at  an Ar 
pressure  of  13  Pa)  for  20  minutes;  and,  finally,  heating  to 
TS=470  K  prior  to  deposition.  The  Si  substrate  temperature 
was measured with a precision of 0.5 K. 
 (ii) A  thin  film  of  Ti with  a  thickness  in  the  range  of  80–100 
nm  was  deposited  via  thermal  evaporation  of  Ti  (99.99%)  at 
P=2x10-4  Pa  over  a  period  of  2 –3  seconds  in  a  spiral-shaped  
tungsten evaporator (substrate temperature TS=440K). 
 (iii)  The  film  was  exposed  to  dry  O2  for  a  period  of  0–40 
seconds at P=(4 –10)x10 -4 Pa. 
(iv) A  thin Ag  film with  a  thickness  of  approximately  1.2  mm 
was  deposited  via  thermal  evaporation  of  Ag  (99.99%)  at 
P=2.5x10-4  Pa  over  a  period  of  2–3  seconds  (substrate 
temperature TS =440 K). 
(v)  A  layer  of  Cu  0.5 –4  mm  in  thickness  was  electro plated 
using a sulfate electrolyte (CuSO4 x 5H2O + H2SO4 + C2H5OH 
+  H2O)  in  a  thermo-stabilized  bath  at  a  current  density  of 
J=15 –50 m А/cm2 under mechanical stirring.  
 (vi) Chemical polishing of Cu was carried out (in a mixture of 
H3PO4, HNO3,  and  CH3COOH  at  a  ratio  of  25:50:25,  volume 
fractions) at T=308 K for 1.5 minutes.  
Magnetron  sputtering  was  also  used  to  grow  the  Ti 
and Ag  films.  In  this  case,  steps  (ii) –(iv)  above w ere  replaced 
by the following steps:  
(ii*)  DC  magnetron  sputtering  of  Ti  (99.99%)  was  performed 
at a magnetron voltage of 370 V with a current of 1.5 A for 15 
seconds  at  P=7.9x10-1  Pa  and  a  substrate  temperature  of 
TS=423–433 K. 
 (iii*) The resulting film was exposed to dry O2  for a period of 
0 –40 seconds at a pressure in the range of 8x10 -4  to 8x10-3 Pa. 
 (iv*)  DC  magnetron  sputtering  of  Ag  (99.99%)  was  carried 
out  at  a  voltage  of  450  V  with  a  current  of  0.5  A  over  80 
seconds  at  P=8x10-1  Pa  and  a  substrate  temperature  of 
TS=425–450 K.  
The  sample was  subsequently  exposed  to  ambient  air 
and  a  thick Cu  layer was  electroplated  on  the Ag  surface. The 
Cu  layer  was  deposited  using  a  sulfate  electrolyte  (CuSO4  x 
5H2O + H2SO4  + C2H5OH + H2O)  in a  thermo-stabilized bath, 
at  a  current  density  in  the  range  of  J=15–50  m А/cm2  under 

 

2 

mechanical  stirring.  Two  baths  were  used  to  stabilize  the 
electrolyte  temperature.  The  electrolyte  temperature  was 
varied within  the  range  of  T=296.5–308 K  and  stabilized with 
an  accuracy  of  0.3  K.  The  electrolyte  used  was  simple  in  its 
composition,  stable,  easy  to  manipulate  and  allowed  high 
current  densities.  Ethyl  alcohol  was  used  to  prevent  the 
formation  of  monovalent  Cu  ions,  resulting  in  dense,  finely 
crystalline  precipitates.  An  electrically  insulated  current  lead 
was connected to the Si wafer from the backside. 
 

2.2 Sandwich separation  
Cu/A g/Ti/Si sandwiches  (Fig. 1a) were subsequently 
separated by using the reduced  
 

 

Fig. 1 Cross-section of a Cu/Ag/Ti/Si sandwich: a) before separation: 
b) and after separation . 

adhesion between  the Ti  and Ag  layers. Bulk Ti/Si  and Ag/Cu 
electrodes  are shown  in Fig. 1b. Either  heating or  cooling was 
used to separate the sandwiches. The structures separated  as a 
result  of  the  different  thermal  expansion  parameters  of  the  Si 
and  Cu  electrodes  and  the  low  adhesion  between  the  Ti  and 
Ag layers. The separations took place in the process of heating 
within the temperature range of 298–360 K and cooli ng within 
the range 298–260 K.  
Two  numbers  are  used  in  this  work  to  describe 
sdq ,  which 
adhesion:  the  probability  of  separation  damage, 
describes  probability  of  damage  in  the  process  of  separation 
(gauge  damage  to  the  Si  substrate);  and  the  probability  of 
edq ,which  describes  the probability of 
electroplating damage, 
liquid entering the Ag/Ti interface during electroplating. These 
two  probabilities  were  used  instead  of  the  tape-pull  test  to 
estimate  adhesion.  After  separation,  the  thicknesses  of  the 
Ag/Cu  electrodes  were  measured  using  a  point  micrometer 
(Heidenhain).  
The  best  samples  were  separated  by  heating  or 
cooling  inside  an  evacuated  volume.  For  this  process,  each 
sandwich  was  placed 
inside  a  PZT-type  cylindrical 
piezoelectric  actuator  produced  by  PI  Ceramic,  which  had 
electrodes  on  the  inside  and  outside  surfaces  for  applying 
voltage.  This  cylindrical  actuator  was  used  for  vacuum-gap 
opening  and  adjustment,  and  also  as  housing.  After  vacuum 
was  reached  inside  the  housing,  the  sandwich  was  separated. 
DC voltage was then applied to the actuator electrodes to open 

the  vacuum  nanogap  in  situ.  Nanogap  width  was  adjusted  by 
applying  varying DC  voltages  in  the  range  of  -700 V  to  +500 
V to the piezoelectric actuator electrodes.  
 

2.3 Surface conformity measurements 
The  surface  conformity  (i.e.,  the  absolute  curvature 
value)  of  the  Ag/Cu  electrodes  was  measured  using  a 
Michelson interferometer oriented toward the Ag side [18]. An 
He-Ne  laser  with  a  wavelength  of  l=632.8  nm  served  as  a 
light  source.  One  of  the  interferometer  mirrors  was  replaced 
by  the  mirror-surface  of  an  Ag/Cu  electrode.  An  interference 
pattern  was  formed  in  the  air  gap  between  one  of  the  mirrors 
and  a  virtual  image  of  the  second  mirror  (in  our  case,  the 
sample). When  the air gap was plane-parallel,  fringes of  equal 
inclination  (circular  fringes)  were  obtained  (Fig.  2).  After 
fixing, the sample was adjusted to obtain an  
 

 

Fig. 2 Michelson  interference  rings for an Ag/Cu  electrode  (observed 
from  the Ag side). The light source was a He–Ne  las er of wavelength  
630 nm. 

interference  pattern  with  fringes  of  equal  inclination.  By 
counting the number of fringes, n, the absolute curvature could 
2/l·= nN
. The sign of  the 
be calculated using the formula 
curvature  was  examined  by  pressing  the  longer  leg  of  the 
mirror. An unbending of the  fringes in  the  interference pattern 
indicated  surface  convexity  and  a  bending  of  the  fringes 
indicated  concavity.  To  determine  a  normalized  curvature  a 
(la=
for  the  metal  electrode,  the  formula 
/)2/
n
D
  was 
used. The  initial  normalized  curvatures  for  the  base  electrodes 
(Si  wafers)  of  diameter  50  mm,  40  mm,  and  20  mm  were  57 
nm/mm,  47  nm/mm,  and  16  nm/mm,  respectively.  We 
monitored 
the 
temperature  during 
the 
interferometer 
measurements  to  ensure  that  it was  equal  to  the  electroplating 
temperature. 

3. Results and Discussion 

The  initial samples  fabricated without exposure  to O2  
exhibited  mechanically  damaged  Ti/Si  and  Ag/Cu  surfaces 
after  separation.  The  Ti/Si  electrode  exhibited  gouging 
damage on  the Si wafer  and  the Ag/Cu  electrode was strongly 
deformed.  This  damage  resulted  from  the  high  adhesion 
between  the  thin  films.  It  was  difficult  to  obtain  sandwiches 
with predefined separation temperatures. The results in general 

 

were not  reproducible, but some dependence upon the residual 
gas  pressure  Pr  was  noted.  Additionally,  it  was  found  that 
results were dependent on the time interval between the Ti and 
Ag  depositions,  t,  and  substrate  temperature,  TS.  When  the 
parameters  Pr,  TS    and  t  were  varied,  structures  with  variable 
adhesions  were  obtained.  Therefore,  we  introduce  formally 
three  intervals  of  adhesion:  (i)  strong  adhesion,  if  gouging 
damage  to  the  Si  wafer  was  observed  after  separation;    (ii) 
intermediate  adhesion,  if  the  structures  separated  without 
visible  damage;  (iii)  weak  adhesion,  if  electrolyte  entered  the 
Ti/Ag  interface  during  the  electroplating.  To  describe  the 
adhesion numerically we calculate several parameters, defined 
as  follows.  The  probability  of  separation  damage  was 
q =
(
)
/
N
N
sdN is  the  number 
calculated  as 
,  where 
sd
sd
total
of  separation-damaged 
(gouging-damaged)  samples  and 
totalN
is  the  total  number  of  samples.  The  probability  of 
q =
/
(
)
N
N
electroplating damage was  calculated  as 
, 
ed
ed
total
edN is  the  number  of  samples  in  which  electrolyte 
where 
totalN
entered  the  Ag/Ti  interface  and 
is  the  total  number  of 
samples.  The  total  number  of  samples  in  all  calculations  was 
totalN
= 300. 

 
3.1 Adhesion control 
 
To  regulate  adhesion  more  precisely,  we  introduced 
the  step  of  flooding  the  deposition  chamber  with  dry  O2. 
Samples were  exposed  to O2    after Ti  deposition  until  a  given 
pressure  PO2  was  obtained,  and  the  O2    was  then  pumped  out 
sdq  and  
before Ag deposition. Fig. 3 presents variations in 

 

Fig.  3  Probabilities  of 

)
( Pq sd
separation  damage, 
-
( Pqed
)
1
)
(
Pqed
electroplating  without  damage, 
  is  the 
,  where 
probability  of  electroplating  damage,  expressed  as  a  function  of  O2  
pressure  between  growth  of  the  Ti  and  Ag  layers.  Data  recorded  at 
constant TS =440 K and t=20 seconds. 

,  and 

edq-1
  (or  1 
probability  of  electroplating  without  damage 
edq )  as 
minus  the  probability  of  electroplating  damage 
functions  of  PO2  for  substrate  temperatures  in  the  range  of 
TS=440  K  and  an  O2  exposure  time  of  t=30  seconds.  To 
present  the  pressure  dependence  of  adhesion, we  combine  the 
edq-1
sdq   and   
and plot  them  together.  
probability  functions 

3 

Axis breaks were  introduced  to  separate  the  two  functions. As 
shown  in  Fig.  3,  adhesion  decreases  with  increasing  PO2.  The 
0@
0@
sdq
edq
, 
, 
highest-quality  Ti/Si  and  Ag/Cu 
 
2OP =5.5x10-3 –
corresponding  to  a  pressures  in  the  range  of 
6.5x10-3 Pa. Within this range, both damage probabilities, 
sdq  
edq , were low.  
and 
investigated 
We  also 
 
the 
the  dependence  of 
edq-1
  on  the    exposure  time,  t,  with 
sdq and 
probabilities 
the substrate temperature and O2 pressure held constant at TS = 
2OP =6x10-3  Pa.  These  results  are  shown  in  Fig.  4. 
440 K  and 
The data show that adhesion decreases with increasing t.  

 

,  and 

Fig.  4  Probabilities  of 

( Pq sd
)
separation  damage, 
-
( Pqed
)
1
)
(
Pqed
  is  the 
,  where 
electroplating  without  damage, 
probability  of  electroplating  damage,  expressed  as  a  function  of  O2 
exposure time between growth of the Ti and Ag layers. Data recorded 
2OP =6x10-3 Pa. 
at constant TS =440 K and 
sdq and 
Finally,  the  dependence  of  the  probabilities 
 
edq-1
on the substrate temperature was recorded, with the O2  

 

Fig.  5  Probabilities  of 

( Pq sd
)
separation  damage, 
-
( Pqed
)
1
)
(
Pqed
electroplating  without  damage, 
  is  the 
,  where 
probability  of  electroplating  damage,  expressed  as  a  function  of 
temperature  during  exposure  to O2  between  growth  of  the Ti  and Ag 
2OP =6x10-3 Pa and t=20 seconds. 
layers. Data recorded at constant
 

,  and 

 

4 

2OP =6x10-3  Pa 
pressure  and  exposure  time  held  constant  at 
and  t=20  second  (Fig.  5).  The  data  show  that  adhesion 
increases with increasing substrate temperature. 
No  difference  in  adhesion  regulation  was  observed 
between  the  thermally  evaporated  and  sputtered  films  of  Ti 
and  Ag.  The  sandwiches  incorporating  both  sputtered  films 
and  thermally  evaporated  ones  separated  at  approximately  the 
same  temperatures  and  the  separated  electrodes  showed  quite 
similar relative curvatures.  
 
The  above  experimentally  determined  adhesion 
results  can  be  interpreted  according  to  the  following  scheme. 
Exposing  a  Ti  film  to  O2  during  fabrication  oxidizes  the 
surface of  the Ti  film,  forming  an  ultra-thin  TiO2  layer with  a 
reduced  surface  energy.  The  self-cleaning  properties  of  TiO2 
layers  are  described  in  reference  [19].  This  reduction  in 
surface  energy  is  characteristic  of  all  metal  oxides,  including 
Ti  [20].  The  surface  energy  is  reduced  further  as  the  oxide 
coverage  increases. After  the entire  surface  is  covered with an 
oxide  layer,  the  surface  energy  continues  to  decrease  with 
increasing  oxide  thickness.  This  assumption  follows  from 
consideration  of  the  driving  force  of  the  continued  reaction  as 
the  thickness  of  the  oxide  layer  increases.  After  the  added O2 
is  pumped  out,  an  Ag  film  is  deposited,  covering  the  TiO2 
layer.  Because Ag  does  not  react with  TiO2  [21],  there  are  no 
chemical  bonds  at  the  TiO2  /Ag  interface.  The  ultra-thin  TiO2 
layer  thus  serves  as  a  barrier  between  the  Ti  and  Ag  atoms, 
preventing  their  intermixing.  The  TiO2  layer  simultaneously 
makes  the  Ti  surface  chemically  inert.  It  follows  that  the 
Ti/Ag  interface  has  the  lowest  adhesion  with  respect  to  the 
other interfaces  (Ti/Si, Ag/Cu) in the sandwich. Consequently, 
the  sandwich  separates  at  the  TiO2  /Ag  interface.  The 
interactions  between  TiO2  films  and  Ag  have  been  studied 
previously  [22,  23].  According  to  this  model,  if  adhesion  is 
reduced  with  increasing  oxide  coverage,  it  should  also  be 
reduced with increasing oxide thickness after complete surface 
coverage  is  achieved. This  is supported by  the data  from Figs. 
3  and  4.  An  increase  in  oxide  thickness  and  a  corresponding 
decrease  in  adhesion  are  observed  in  both  figures.  In  the  case 
of  Fig.  3,  the  increase  in  oxide  thickness  results  from 
increasing  O2  pressure  at  fixed  TS  and  t,  while  in  the  case  of 
Fig. 4,  this  increase in oxide thickness results   from increasing 
t  at  fixed
2OP and  TS.  In  a  high-adhesion  regime  (Figs.  3,  4) 
with  a  high  probability  of   separation  damage,  the  TiO2 
coverage  of  the  surface  appears  to  be  incomplete.  Ti  and  Ag 
atoms  intermix  within  open  areas  on  the  surface  (i.e.,  areas 
where  there  is  no  TiO2  barrier),  forming  a  Ti-Ag  alloy.  This 
mixing  leads  to high local adhesion  and  separation damage. In 
the  low-adhesion  regime,  TiO2  coverage  is  complete  and  the 
oxide  film  is  thick,  resulting  in  an  adhesion  that is sufficiently 
low  for  electrochemical  liquid  to  enter  between  the  TiO2  and 
Ag  films.  The  intermediate  adhesion  regime  between  the  two 
regimes  mentioned  above  was  most  suitable  for  sandwich 
separation without electrode damage and deformation.  
The  observed  increase  in  adhesion  with  increasing 
substrate  temperature  at  fixed  PO2  and  t  (Fig.  5)  can  be 
explained by the presence of adsorbed O2  on the TiO2 surface. 
Adsorbed  O2  is  in  thermodynamic  equilibrium  with  the  gas 
phase  and  its  surface  concentration  is  reduced with  increasing 
increases  with 
therefore 
temperature.  Adhesion 
surface 

increasing  TS.  This  result  is  also  supported  by  the  higher  rate 
of adhesion increase with temperature for higher temperatures, 
i.e., TS>430 K (Fig. 5).  
To  obtain  conformal  electrodes,  we  chose 
 
the 
2OP =6x10-3  Pa,  TS  =400  K  and  t=20 
fabrication  conditions 
seconds  as 
the  optimal 
technological  parameters.  This 
optimization  resulted  in  a  stable  separation  temperature  and  a 
reduced normalized curvature for the Ag/Cu electrode.  
 

3.2 Electrode conformity 

A  fundamental  problem  under  investigation  was  the 
surface  conformity  of  the  electrodes.  Initially,  a  majority  of 
the  Si  substrates  were  convex  (as  a  result  of  the  mechanical 
polishing  step).  Each  Si  wafer  was  observed  to  curve  in  an 
arbitrary  direction  with  respect  to  its  initial  curvature  during 
the process of Cu electroplating . After separation , each wafer 
always  returned  to  its  initial  curvature.  However,  the  Ag/Cu 
electrode  adopted  a  concave  (Fig.  6a)  or  convex  (Fig.  6b) 
curvature  depending  on  the  electroplating  regime  .  A  concave 
Ag/Cu  electrode  was  needed  to  obtain  a  conformal  pair.  We 
investigated  the  dependence  of  the  sign  of  the  curvature  (i.e., 
the  fraction  of  concave  and  convex  surfaces  expressed  as  a 
percentage)  on 
thickness  and  electroplating 
the  wafer 
temperature . When wafers of 1-mm thickness were used, the  

Table  1.  Percentage  of  Ag/Cu  electrodes  that  were  concave  for 
several  values  of  electroplating  temperature.  The  electrode  diameters 
were 12 mm and 3 mm. 

 

Compressive  prestress  was  present  in  the  Ag/Cu 
electrodes,  exhibited  by  the  fact  that  these  electrodes  were 
always  more  convex  than  the  corresponding  Si/Ti  electrodes 
(Fig.  6).  In  the  absolute majority  of  cases when  electroplating 
failed,  edge  delamination  of 
the  Ag/Cu  electrode  was 
observed. Buckle delamination was observed only in a few test 
samples.  These  results  need  further  explanation  because  in 
other  experiments  the  opposite  results  have  been  observed 
(i.e.,  buckle  delamination  dominated  over  edge  delamination) 
is 
[24].  Our  hypothesis 
that  a  much  lower  value  of 
compressive  prestress  s
  was  present  in  our  experiments  in 
comparison  to  those  previously  reported  (because  our  work 
was  focused  on  the  reduction  of  s  [17]).  This  explanation  is 
in  good  agreement  with  an  edge  delamination  model  for  the 
compressed  films.  As  shown  in  reference  [25],  the  apparent 
edge  toughness  that  is  observed  in most  experiments  vanishes 
for low values of s.  

 
3.3 Tunneling area evaluation 
 We  also  evaluated  the  tunneling  area,  defined  as  the 
interior  region  for  which  the  distance  between  the  electrodes, 
a,  was  less  than  5  nm.  The  tunneling  area  can  be  estimated 
from simple geometric calculations. For  these calculations, we 
consider  the  cross-section  of  the  sandwich  (Fig.  7).  The 
tunneling area is defined as the 
 

 

 

Fig. 6 Sandwich after separation in the cases of a) convex Ti/Si 
electrode and concave Ag/Cu electrode;  b) convex Ti/Si electrode 
and convex Ag/Cu electrode. 

percentage  of  concave  surfaces  was  22%.  For  2-mm  thick 
wafers,  the  percentage  of  concave  surfaces  was  59%. 
Increasing the wafer thickness thus increased the percentage of 
concave  surfaces  by  a  factor  of  2.7.  The  dependence  of  the 
sign  of  the  curvature  on  the  electrolyte  temperature  was 
investigated  as  well.  The  results  for  2-mm  thick  wafers  with 
Ag/Cu  diameters  of  12  mm  and  3  mm  are  given  in  Table  1. 
The  best  results  were  obtained  for  T=  306  K  and  308  K, 
respectively. More  detailed  data on  electroplating  is  presented 
in reference [17].  

 

 

 

Fig. 7 Representation of the sandwich cross-section, where AE is the 
Ti/Si electrode effective surface and BD is the Ag/Cu electrode 
effective surface. 

area  of  the  ring  with  an  external  radius  equal  to  the  sample 
radius  ОС  and  an  internal  radius  ОF.  Replacing  the  arcs  АС 
and BС with straight lines, we find that the contact area can be 
= p
-
(2
2()
/
)
/
S
Har
Ha
expressed  by  the  formula 
  with 
adequate  accuracy.  Within  this  expression,  H=AB  is  the 
maximum difference between  the curvatures and a=DE. Table 
2 presents results for the samples with 3-mm diameters. Н was 
l·= nH
, where n  is  fringe 
determined  from  the  expression 
number.  

5 

References: 

[1]  A.N.  korotkov,  M.R.  Samuelsen,  S.A.  Vasenko,  J.  Appl. 
Phys. 76 (1994) 3623- 3631.  
[2]  A.  Tavkhelidze,  G.  Skhiladze,  A.  Bibilashvili,  L. 
Tsakadze,  L.  Jangidze,  Z.  Taliashvili,  I.  Cox,  Z.  Berishvili, 
Proc.  XXI  International  Conf.  on    Thermoelectricsc,  August 
26 –29 IEEE, New York, pp. (2002) 435–438.  
[3]  Y.  Hishinuma,  T.  H.  Geballe,  B.  Y.  Moyzhes,  and  T.  W. 
Kenny, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78 (2001) 2572.  
[4]  T. Zeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 88 (2006) 153104. 
[5] Z. Xin, Z. Dian-Lin, Chinese Phys. 16 (2007) 2656–2660. 
[6] A. Tavkhellidze, V. Svanidze, L. Tsakadze, J. Vac. Sci. 
Technol. A, 26 (2008) 5. 
[7]  Hishinuma  I.,  Geballe  T.H.,  Moyzhes  B.I.,  Kenny  T.W., 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 94 (2003) 4690.   
[8] A. N. Tavkhelidze, J. Appl. Phys. 108 (2010) 044313.  
[9]  E.A.  Chávez-Urbiola,  Yu.V.  Vorobiev,  L.P.  Bulat,  Solar 
Energy 86 (2012) 369–378. 
[10] G. B. Smith and C. G. Granqvist, Green Nanotechnology, 
Solutions 
for  Sustainability  and  Energy 
in 
the  Built 
Environment, CRC Press, (2011). 
[11]  C.  Knight  and  J.  Davidson,  in  Advances  in  wireless 
sensors  and  sensor  networks,  S.C.  Mukhopadhyay,  H.  Leng 
(Ed.), Springer, (2010), p. 221 
[12]  L.  P.  Bulat,  D.  A.  Pshenaĭ-Severin,  Physics  of  the  Solid 
State 52 (2010) 485–492. 
[13]  Y.  C.  Gerstenmaier,  G.  Wachutka,  AIP  Conf.  Proc.  890 
(2007) 349.  
[14] G. Despesse, T. Jager, J. Appl. Phys. 96 (2004) 5026. 
[15]  H.  J.  Goldsmid,  Thermoelectrics,  La  Grande  Motte, 
France,  August  17  21,  2003,  Proceedings  ICT'03.  22nd 
International Conference on Thermoelectrics  (2003) 433. 
[16] M. H.  Tanielian,  R.  B. Greegor,  J.  A. Nielsen,  and  C. G. 
Parazzoli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 99, 123104 (2011). 
[17]  L.  Jangidze,  A.Tavkhelidze,  Y.  Blagidze,  Z.  Taliashvili, 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 159 (2012) D413-D417. 
[18] P. Hariharan, Optical interferometry, Elsevier, (2003). 
[19] T. Tolkea, A. Kriltzb, A. Rechtenbacha, Thin Solid Films 
518 (2010) 4242–4246.  
[20]  J.  A.  Venables,  Introduction  to  surface  and  thin  film 
processes, Cambridge university press, 2000, p. 4 
[21] U. Diebold, Surface Science Reports 48 (2003) 53 –223.  
[22] S.-Y. Jung, T.-J. Ha, C.-S. Park, W.-S. Seo, Y. S. Lim, S. 
Shin, H. H. Cho, H.-H. Park, Thin Solid Films 529  (2013) 94-
97.   
[23]  N.  Duraisamya,  N.  M.  Muhammada,  H.-C.  Kimb,  J.-D. 
Joc, K.-H. Choi, Thin Solid Films 520 (2012) 5070–5 074. 
[24]  L.  B.  Freund,  S.  Suresh,  Thin  Film  Materials:  Stress, 
Defect  Formation  and  Surface  Evolution,  Cambridge 
University Press, 2003 
[25] D. S. Balint, J. W. Hutchinson, J. Appl. Mech., 68 (2001) 
725 
 

Table  2.  Michelson  interference  rings  and  corresponding  contact 
areas  for  3-mm-diameter  Ag/Cu  electrodes  grown  at  T=296.5  K  and 
T=308 K.  

Table  2  shows  that  the  maximum  tunneling  areas 
were  obtained  for  samples  grown  at  T=296.5  K.  In  this  case, 
the  area  of  the  entire  interior  region  was  tunneling  area, 
signifying that a vacuum nanogap of width less than 5 nm was 
formed (for an electrode 3 mm in diameter).  

 

4. Conclusions 

Multilayer  Cu/Ag/Ti/Si  sandwiches  were  grown  to 
obtain  vacuum  nanogap  tunnel  junctions.  The  adhesion  at  the 
Ag/Ti  interface was  controlled  to  separate  each  sandwich  and 
open  the  vacuum  nanogap  between  the  Ti/Si  and  Ag/Cu  bulk 
electrodes. Adhesion was reduced by pumping dry O2  into the 
vacuum  chamber  between  the  growth  of  the  Ti  and  Ag  thin 
films.  A  thick  Cu  electrode  was  then  electroplated  on  the  Ag 
film  and  the  structure  was  separated  by  heating  or  cooling 
using  a  thermal  expansion  mismatch.  Adhesion  at  the  Ag/Ti 
interface  was  optimized  by  varying  the  O2  pressure  PO2,  the 
substrate  temperature  TS  and  the  O2  exposure  time  t.  The 
probabilities  of  separation  damage  and  electroplating  damage 
were  recorded  for  300  samples  as  functions  of  PO2,  TS  and  t. 
Based  on  these  experimental  results  we  propose  that  an  ultra-
thin  TiO2  film  grows  on  Ti  during  its  exposure  to  O2.  This 
TiO2  layer reduces the surface energy and also prevents Ti and 
Ag  atoms  from  intermixing  at  the  Ag/Ti  interface.  The 
adhesion  reduction  depends  on  the  TiO2  coverage  in  the  case 
of  an  ultra-thin  TiO2  layer  and  on  the  TiO2  film  thickness  in 
the  case  of  complete  coverage.  The  optimal  technological 
parameters  were  found  to  be  PO2=6x10-3  Pa,  TS=400  K  and 
t=20  seconds.  The  Ag/Cu  and  Ti/Si  electrode  surfaces  were 
analyzed  via  Michelson  interferometry  and  both  the  adhesion 
strength  and  electroplating  regime  were  adjusted  to  obtain 
conformal  electrodes  for  vacuum  nanogap  tunnel  junction 
applications.  

Acknowledgments 

 
The  authors  thank  A.  Bibilashvili,  G.  Skhiladze  and 
R.  Melkadze  for  useful  discussions.  This  work  was  partly 
supported by Borealis Technical. 

 

 

6 

