a

Electric-field induced switching from fcc to hcp stacking of a single layer of Fe/Ni(111)

1Institut fur Nanotechnologie, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany

2Physikalisches Institut, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany

Lukas Gerhard1, Moritz Peter2, Wulf Wulfhekel1,2

We present a detailed study of an electric-field induced phase transition of a single layer of Fe on
a Ni(111) substrate. Scanning tunneling microscopy at 4 K substrate temperature is used to provide
the necessary electric field and to follow the transition from face-centered cubic to hexagonal close-
packed stacking with atomic resolution.

The concept of electric-field induced switching of mag-
netic metallic nanosystems is of particular interest in
the view of potential applications in data storage de-
vices and led to a tremendous increase of research ac-
tivities during the last few years1 -- 5.
In the case of
2 ML Fe islands on Cu(111), it has been shown that
a martensitic phase transition between ferromagnetic
body-centered cubic(bcc) and antiferromagnetic face-
centered cubic (fcc) phases is induced upon application
of high electric fields. Herein, the coexistence of two
different crystallographic phases and the complex mag-
netic order are closely interwoven3,6. Considering the
interatomic distances between nearest neighbors dnn and
the resulting lattice mismatch, a Ni(111) surface where
dnn = 248 pm should be an ideal candidate to promote
the coexistence of Fe fcc (dnn = 253 pm) and bcc (dnn =
247 pm) films. The first layer of Fe/Ni(111) was consid-
ered to nucleate in the hexagonal close-packed (hcp) sites
in theoretical calculations and photoelectron diffraction
experiments7,8, while in other experiments, the fcc sites
seemed to be favorable9. This fact already hints at a pos-
sible coexistence of fcc and hcp phases in the first layers
of Fe/Ni(111), which is known for Fe/Ir(111)10,11. With
increasing thickness, a transition from fcc to bcc was re-
ported at thicknesses of 3 to 6 ML8,12. Altogether this
makes the system of Fe/Ni(111) a complex but promising
system in the view of possible magnetoelectric coupling
(MEC).

We studied the crystallographic structure of Fe films
with a local thickness of 1 to 4 ML grown on a Ni(111)
single crystal in a low temperature scanning tunneling
microscope (STM). STM has been proven to be an ideal
tool as it allows the application of extremely high electric
fields and at the same time it offers unequaled spacial
resolution. Here we fully exploit the potential of STM,
directly imaging the transition of a 1 ML Fe film from fcc
to hcp stacking with atomic resolution in electric fields
of the order of 1 GeV/m.

A Ni single crystal always includes a considerable
amount of contaminations and an atomically clean
Ni(111) could not be obtained by standard cleaning pro-
cedures. After systematical testing, we finally obtained
the lowest contamination (about 1 unwanted molecule
per 100 Ni atoms, see Fig. 1a)) with the following prepa-
ration procedure: After repeated cycles of annealing at
temperatures > 700 ◦C in order to promote segregation of
contaminants to the surface and cleaning by Argon sput-

tering, the last sputtering was short, just enough as to
remove residual contamination due to the previous an-
nealing. The final annealing was shortened to about 1
second at 400 ◦C to avoid further segregation, to reduce
heating of the sample surroundings and thus to mini-
mize cool-down time before deposition of Fe. A cool
down is necessary to avoid intermixing of the imping-
ing Fe atoms with the Ni(111) crystal. During this time
(about 1 h at 1 · 10−10 mbar), the Ni(111) surface became
partly contaminated. Such contamination leads to an ir-
regular growth of the Fe film (see Fig. 1b)) and extended
clusters with a regular 2 × 2 superstructure on the bare
Ni and particularly on the deposited Fe film (see Fig.
1c)). This superstructure can be explained by a hydro-
gen induced reorganization of the atomic structure as it
has been observed by An et al.13 or by carbon contam-
ination which we found by Auger electron spectroscopy
(not shown). Cleaner Fe films were obtained by the fol-
lowing measures: 1) For the cool down the Ni(111) sam-
ple was placed in the chamber containing the He cryostat
which has a lower base pressure of residual gases (e. g.
hydrogen). 2) Just before the deposition of Fe, the pres-
sure in the preparation chamber was further improved
by sublimation of titanium on the walls cooled with liq-
uid nitrogen. Thereby a base pressure of 4 · 10−11 mbar
was achieved during the deposition of Fe. A so-prepared
submonolayer Fe film showed a well-ordered morphology
with larger terraces and islands oriented along the h1 1 0i
directions (see Fig. 1d)).

In topographic measurements on the 1 ML thick Fe
films, bright domain boundaries can be seen which en-
close irregular domains (see Fig. 2a)). Measurements of
the differential conductance dI/dV at energies close to
the Fe surface state at −200 mV14 reveal the white lines
in the topography as boundaries between two electroni-
cally different domains. As can be seen in a map of the
differential conductance (dI/dV ) taken at −130 mV (see
inset in Fig. 2b)) the enclosed domains appear darker.
In the dI/dV spectrum, the two phases of 1 ML Fe show
different intensities in the negative energy range (see Fig.
2b)). In order to identify the crystallographic structure of
the two phases, we performed atomically resolved STM
measurements. Fig. 2c) shows an enlarged view of a
domain boundary with atomic resolution. The superim-
posed hexagonal grid is adjusted to the Fe atoms outside
the domain (on the lower part of the image) which have a
perfectly hexagonal structure and follow the Ni substrate

a)

c)

b)

d)

2

c)

hcp

d)

FIG. 1. a) Atomically resolved STM topography of the bare
Ni(111) single crystal surface, 7 × 7 nm2. b), d) 60 × 60 nm2
topography of similar amounts of Fe deposited at about 30 ◦C:
b) Standard preparation leading to a highly contaminated
surface and irregular islands with a 2 × 2 superstructure (c)
induced by adsorbates on an Fe island (enclosed in red) and
on the Ni surface. d) Optimized preparation with reduced
surface contamination.

stacking in an fcc order. Within the domain, the fcc grid
(blue) does not lie on top of the Fe atoms but exactly in-
between on threefold hollow sites. This indicates a hcp
stacking of the Fe monolayer with respect to the Ni sub-
strate inside the domain. Hence the observed boundaries
are surface dislocations between fcc and hcp domains.
About 10 % of the first Fe layer shows hcp stacking with
domain boundaries mainly perpendicular to the Ni step
edges. This is in agreement with photoelectron diffrac-
tion measurements15. As can be seen in Fig. 2c), the
introduction of the hcp domains leads to a reduction of
the atomic density in the top layer of about 1.4 %. This
is equivalent to a reduction of the strain energy of the fcc
Fe film.

To test for MEC, high electric fields were applied by
increasing the applied bias voltage. In the 1 ML Fe film,
it is possible to induce structural changes by the resulting
high electric fields as is shown in Fig. 2: The same field
of view is shown before (c) and after (d) an electric-field
induced change. It can be seen that a small area of about
20 atoms switched from the hcp domain to the fcc do-
main thus shifting the domain boundary by about 1 nm.
This transition corresponds to a collective displacement
of the Fe atoms by 143 pm along the [1 2 1]f cc direction
from the hcp threefold hollow sites to the fcc positions.
The new domain boundary in this direction is confined
to only one interatomic distance while it extends over 3
to 5 interatomic distances in the pristine configuration.
In a further experiment the bistability of the switching
was confirmed. An hcp domain was imaged at a moder-
ate electric field of 0.6 GV/m (see Fig. 3a)). The domain
boundaries appear dark and the hcp and the fcc domains

fcc

FIG. 2. Fe/Ni(111): a) STM topography of a 1 ML Fe film
(light gray) at a Ni step edge (black) with domain boundaries
appearing in white. b) In a dI/dV map at −130 mV (see
inset, position indicated by red rectangle in a)), two different
intensities divide the 1 ML Fe terrace into domains. dI/dV
spectra outside the domain on the Fe terrace (solid orange)
and inside the domain (dashed blue) show different spectra
for the two phases.
c) Atomic resolution STM showing a
coexistence of hcp and fcc lattices with light domain walls.
The overlaid hexagonal grid is adjusted to the fcc lattice and
colored orange on the fcc area and blue on the hcp area. d)
Same area as in c) after an electric field-induced change of
the lattice. About 20 atoms change their stacking from hcp
to fcc thus shifting the domain boundary to the left by about
1 nm.

are marked with blue and orange. A high electric field
pulse of 7.9 GV/m and 0.1 s was applied at the position
marked with the red cross as to locally change the struc-
ture. A second STM image at 0.6 GV/m shows the ma-
nipulated configuration with a reduced hcp domain (see
Fig.3b)). After a second electric field pulse, the original
situation was restored (see Fig. 3c)).

In order to prove that the observed switching is in-
duced by the applied electric field, we performed a sys-
tematic study varying the applied voltage and the dis-
tance between tip and sample. For each distance, which
we estimated from the tunneling current and bias volt-
age, the same line across the hcp domain was scanned
repeatedly while the bias voltage was increased. This al-
lows to measure the critical value of the voltage at which
the domain boundary is displaced (see Fig. 3d)). We
repeated this experiment for a set of distances and the
measured critical values can be nicely fitted by a linear
distance dependence of the voltage as it is expected for
a critical electric field. This excludes other mechanisms
than the electric field because they would result in dis-
tinctly different critical-voltage-distance relations3. The

b)

c)

a)

hcp

fcc

3

fcc

d)

4

3.5

]

V

[
 

3

e
g
a

2.5

t
l

o
v
 
s
a
B

i

2

1.5

1

2 nm

fcc

]

V

[
 

e
g
a

t
l

o
v
 
s
a
B

i

e)

4

3

2

1

0

-1

0

1

2

3

Tip-sample separation [Å]

4

5

FIG. 3. Reproducible switching of the crystallographic struc-
ture of 1 ML Fe/Ni(111) imaged on 6.25 × 6.25 nm2 (dI/dV
map at −190 mV ). a) The initial hcp domain is indicated by a
blue line, the fcc domain by a orange line, domain boundaries
appear dark. An electric field pulse is applied on the position
marked with the red cross after the acquisition of the image.
The new configuration with a smaller hcp domain is imaged
in b) with the initial position of the domains indicated by
dashed lines. A second pulse brings the system back to the
initial state (c)). Critical parameters for the transition: d)
The same line across a hcp domain (blue frame) is repeatedly
scanned while the voltage is ramped. Above a certain criti-
cal voltage (here 2.3 V), the structure partially changes from
hcp to fcc and the domain boundary (dark) is shifted to the
right. Repetition of this measurement at different tip-sample
separations gives the critical electric field shown in e). The
measurement described in d) corresponds to one data point
(black cross). The linear relation between the critical volt-
age and the tip-sample separation corresponds to a critical
electric field of about 10 GV/m.

negative offset of the voltage for zero distance can be
explained by the difference of the work functions of the
tungsten tip and the Fe sample surface which induces a
potential difference even without an externally applied
bias. The slope of the linear fit gives the critical value
of the electric field of about 10 GV/m (see Fig.3e)). This
value is about one order of magnitude larger than the
electric fields needed for MEC in 2 ML Fe/Cu(111)3,16.
These high electric fields require a very stable configura-
tion of the tip apex.

Similar to the experiments on Fe/Cu(111), electric
fields slightly lower than the critical values lead to switch-
ing after a certain residence time16. This can be seen in
Fig. 4a) which shows switching left and right of the do-
main boundary during scanning at a constant electric
field of 7.6 GV/m. However, this implies a high bias volt-
age (in this case 3 V) which leads to a reduced contrast
and a rather low signal-to-noise ratio. Therefore, the dis-
tribution of the residence times ∆t is studied as follows
(see Fig. 4b)): the displacement to the left is induced by
electric field pulses of 1.4 GV/m during 0.1 s (at the po-
sitions indicated in the Fig.), while the switching back

FIG. 4. a) Switching the domain boundary left and right
when scanning across an hcp domain at a constant field of
7.6 GV/m (dI/dV at 3.7 V ). b) Switching left by field pulses
of 1.4 GV/m and right by scanning at 1.0 GV/m across an hcp
domain (blue) (dI/dV at −240 mV). c) In a histogram of the
differential conductance, only two stable states are found. d)
Exponential decay of the fcc state with a lifetime of 0.3 s.

to the right happens after scanning at 1.0 GV/m for some
time. A displacement to the right has never been ob-
served during scanning at this value. The corresponding
histogram of the measured dI/dV intensity at the initial
position of the domain boundary shows only two differ-
ent peaks, corresponding to two stable positions of the
domain boundary. The plot of the residence times of the
hcp state is depicted in Fig. 4d) and shows an exponen-
tial decay with a lifetime τf cc of about 0.3 s. In analogy
to our experiments on Fe/Cu(111) reported in16, this can
be explained by a thermally activated transition between
two local energy minima (see inset in Fig. 4d). In con-
trast to our findings for Fe/Cu(111)17, a clear relation
between the polarity of the electric field and the result-
ing lattice state could not be found. Switching in both
directions was possible with pulses of any polarity with
approximately the same probability.

Deposition of higher amounts of Fe resulted in films
locally 2 and more ML thick, showing a superstructure
with periodic stripes aligned perpendicular to the three
closed packed h1 1 0i directions, in full agreement with
the paper from An et al.18. They observed bright and
dark stripes in STM and two satellite spots in the cor-
responding LEED pattern. This was interpreted as a
bcc (1 1 0) lattice in the Nishiyama-Wassermann orienta-
tion that is expanded in the [1 1 0]bcc direction by 6.5 %.
In our STM measurements, we observed the same stripe
pattern (see Fig. 5a)). However, in our dI/dV maps,

4

we identify three different intensities of the stripes and
thus find a doubled periodicity (see Fig. 5b)), which is
in contradiction to the model proposed by An et al. An
atomically resolved STM image of both the Ni surface
and the 2 ML Fe film (see Fig. 5c)) allows us to un-
ambiguously determine the atomic structure: The 2 ML
Fe film is expanded by 7.5 % in the [1 1 0]f cc direction
and by 1.9 % in the [1 1 2]f cc direction with respect to
the Ni lattice. Fig. 5d) proposes an atomic model that
explains the experimentally observed features by a repe-
tition of fcc, bcc, hcp, bcc-like stripes with a periodicity
of 3.2 nm. The fcc and hcp areas appear dark, the bcc-
like areas appear bright (compare to Fig. 5b)). These
structures of the Fe films thicker than 1 ML could not be
influenced by the applied electric field.

In summary, we have identified the complex crystal-
lographic phase diagram of Fe/Ni(111) by atomic reso-
lution STM. While Fe films of 2 and more layers show
periodic stripes of fcc, bcc and hcp phases, the single
monolayer shows domains of fcc and hcp stacking. By
application of high electric fields, we have been able to
induce a reproducible transition from fcc the stacking to
hcp. The underlying mechanism of this transition is sim-
ilar to that previously observed in 2 ML Fe/Cu(111) and
thus seems to be a more universal concept for metallic
surfaces that is not limited to a particular system.

We acknowledge funding by the DFG under gran WU

349/8-1.

M. Schindler, V. Fritzsche, A. M. Bradshaw, and D. P.
Woodruff, Phys. Rev. B 58, 6768 (1998).
Heinze,

Bergmann,

von

S.

10 K.

Bode,
and R. Wiesendanger,

M.

G. Bihlmayer,
New Journal of Physics 9, 396 (2007).

S. Blgel,

11 B.

Hardrat,

A.

Al-Zubi,

S. Blugel,
G. Bihlmayer,
Phys. Rev. B 79, 094411 (2009).

P.

Ferriani,
S. Heinze,

and

12 R. Wu and A. J. Freeman, Phys. Rev. B 45, 7205 (1992).
13 B. An, L. Zhang, S. Fukuyama,
and K. Yokogawa,

FIG. 5. a) A dI/dV map at −240 mV of Fe/Ni(111) films
thicker than 1 ML shows a stripe pattern perpendicular to the
closed-packed h1 1 0i directions. The lattice directions given
in c) also hold for a). b) Three different intensities of the
stripes are found. c) STM image on the bare Ni surface, 1 ML
Fe and 2 ML Fe with atomic resolution. d) Atomic model of
2 ML Fe/Ni(111) for the observed stripe pattern. The rela-
tive atomic distances of the top layer (gray circles) are taken
from the measurement in c). The expansion of the top layer
by 7.5 % in the [1 1 0] direction leads to a periodicity of 13
interatomic distances (3.2 nm). The bcc lattice (green rect-
angle) is characterized by a twofold bridge-stacking while the
two possible threefold hollow sites correspond to fcc (orange
triangle) and hcp domains (blue triangle).

1 M. Weisheit,

S. Fahler, A. Marty, Y. Souche,

C. Poinsignon, and D. Givord, Science 315, 349 (2007).

2 T. Maruyama, Y. Shiota, T. Nozaki, K. Ohta, N. Toda,
M. Mizuguchi, A. A. Tulapurkar, T. Shinjo, M. Shi-
raishi, S. Mizukami, Y. Ando,
and Y. Suzuki,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 4, 158 (2009).

3 L. Gerhard, T. K. Yamada, T. Balashov, A. F.
Tak´acs, R. J. H. Wesselink, M. Dane, M. Fechner,
S. Ostanin, A. Ernst, I. Mertig,
and W. Wulfhekel,
Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 792 (2010).

4 S.

Subkow

and

M.

Fahnle,

Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 46, 5586 (2007).

Phys. Rev. B 84, 054443 (2011).

14 J. A. Stroscio, D. T. Pierce, A. Davies, R. J. Celotta, and

5 Y. Shiota, T. Nozaki, F. Bonell, S. Murakami, T. Shinjo,

M. Weinert, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2960 (1995).

and Y. Suzuki, Nat. Mater. 11, 39 (2012).

6 S. H. Phark, J. A. Fischer, M. Corbetta, D. Sander,

K. Nakamura, and K. J., Nat. Comms. 5, 5183 (2014).

7 R. C. Longo, E. Martinez, O. Dieguez, A. Vega, and L. J.

Gallego, Nanotechnology 18, 055701 (2007).

8 G. C. Gazzadi, F. Bruno, R. Capelli, L. Pasquali, and

S. Nannarone, Phys. Rev. B 65, 205417 (2002).

9 A. Theobald, V. Fernandez, O. Schaff, P. Hofmann, K.-

15 A. Theobald, V. Fernandez, O. Schaff, P. Hofmann, K.-
M. Schindler, V. Fritzsche, A. M. Bradshaw, and D. P.
Woodruff, Phys. Rev. B 58, 6768 (1998).

16 L. Gerhard, R. J. H. Wesselink, S. Ostanin, A. Ernst, and

W. Wulfhekel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 167601 (2013).

17 L. Gerhard, T. Yamada, T. Balashov, A. Takacs,
S. Os-
and W. Wulfhekel,

R. Wesselink, M. Dane, M. Fechner,
tanin, A. Ernst,

I. Mertig,

Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on 47, 1619 (2011).

18 B. An, L. Zhang, S. Fukuyama,

and K. Yokogawa,

Physical Review B 79, 1 (2009).

5

