Magnetism-induced  massive  Dirac  spectra  and  topological  defects  in  the 
surface state of Cr-doped Bi2Se3-bilayer topological insulators 
 
C.-C. Chen1,2, M. L. Teague1,2, L. He3, X. Kou3, M. Lang3, W. Fan1, N. Woodward1, K.-L. Wang3 
and N.-C. Yeh1,2,4* 
 
1 Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
2  Institute  for  Quantum  Information  and  Matter,  California  Institute  of  Technology,  Pasadena,  CA 

91125, USA 

3 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
4 Kavli Nanoscience Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
* E-mail: ncyeh@caltech.edu 
 
Abstract. Proximity-induced magnetic effects on the surface Dirac spectra of topological insulators 
are investigated by scanning tunneling spectroscopic (STS) studies of bilayer structures consisting of 
undoped  Bi2Se3  thin  films  on  top  of  Cr-doped  Bi2Se3  layers.  For  thickness  of  the  top  Bi2Se3  layer 
equal to or smaller than 3 quintuple layers (QL), a spatially inhomogeneous surface spectral gap  
opens  up  below  a  characteristic  temperature  Tc
2D,  which  is  much  higher  than  the  bulk  Curie 
3D  determined  from  the  anomalous  Hall  resistance.  The  mean  value  and  spatial 
temperature  Tc
homogeneity of the gap generally increase with increasing c-axis magnetic field (H) and increasing 
Cr  doping  level  (x),  suggesting  that  the  physical  origin  of  this  surface  gap  is  associated  with 
proximity-induced c-axis ferromagnetism. On the other hand, the temperature (T) dependence of is 
non-monotonic,  showing  initial  increase  below  Tc
2D,  which  is  followed  by  a  “dip”  and  then  rises 
3D. These phenomena may be attributed to proximity magnetism 
again, reaching maximum at T << Tc
induced by two types of contributions with different temperature dependences: a three-dimensional 
contribution from the bulk magnetism that dominates at low T, and a two-dimensional  contribution 
associated with the RKKY interactions mediated by surface Dirac fermions, which dominates at Tc
3D 
2D.  In  addition  to  the  observed  proximity  magnetism,  spatially  localized  sharp  resonant 
<<  T  <  Tc
spectra are found along the boundaries of gapped and gapless regions. These spectral resonances are 
2D and becoming suppressed 
long-lived at H = 0, with their occurrences being most prominent near Tc
under  strong  c-axis  magnetic  fields.  We  attribute  these  phenomena  to  magnetic  impurity-induced 
topological defects in the spin texture of surface Dirac fermions, with the magnetic impurities being 
isolated Cr impurities distributed near the interface of the bilayer system. The long-term stability of 
these topologically protected two-level states may find potential applications to quantum information 
technology.    

 

1. Introduction 
 
The research of topological matter is an exciting frontier where the classification of quantum states of 
matter  beyond  the  principle  of  symmetry  breaking  has  stimulated  many  conceptual  advances  and 
experimental discoveries [1-3]. Among various topological matter, topological insulators (TIs) [4-8] 
are  bulk  insulators  in  two  or  three  dimensions  with  strong  spin-orbit  coupling  and  gapless  surface 
states protected by the time-reversal invariance (TRI). The gapless surface state of TIs consists of an 
odd number of Dirac cones where the energy-momentum dispersion relation is linear, similar to the 
massless Dirac fermions in graphene except for the odd number of Dirac cones and an additional spin-
momentum locking in the former. Gapping the Dirac cones of TIs by introducing superconductivity 
[9-11] or magnetism [8, 9, 12, 13] via either doping or proximity effects can provide feasible means to 
realize the elusive Majorana modes [9, 10, 14] and topological magnetoelectric (TME) effect [12, 13] 
in condensed matter systems.  

 
The underlying physics for a magnetism-induced surface gap in three-dimensional (3D) TIs is 
based on the assumption that the long-range ferromagnetism has a net magnetization M perpendicular 

to the surface of the 3D-TI, and that the in-plane component of the Hamiltonian H0 for the surface 
Dirac  fermions  remains  intact  after  the  introduction  of  c-axis  magnetization.  Hence,  the  total 
Hamiltonian Htotal for the Dirac fermions becomes  

H

total



H

0



J M
eff


z




v

F



k

1
2

 
x
x



y

y

k





1
2

J M
eff


z

 , 

(1) 

where x,y,z  are  the  Pauli  matrices,  kx,y  refer  to  the  in-plane  momentum  of  the  Dirac  fermions,  Jeff 
denotes  the ferromagnetic  coupling  constant  in  the  surface  state,  and vF  is  the  Fermi  velocity.  The 
kE  for the magnetism-induced massive Dirac fermions can be obtained by 
energy dispersion relation 
diagonalizing Htotal in Eq. (1), which yields 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
kE



v k
F

2







J M
ex

2

2



 , 

(2) 

. Hence, an energy gap  = (JeffM) opens up at the Dirac point for a finite c-axis 

2

2
y

2
x

k

k



k

where 
magnetization M > 0 according to Eq. (2). 
 

Experimental evidences for the occurrence of long-range ferromagnetism in the surface state 
of  3D-TIs  have  been  manifested  by  the  observation  of  surface  gap  opening  in  angle  resolved 
photoemission  spectroscopy  (ARPES)  [15-18]  and  the  confirmation  of  quantized  anomalous  Hall 
effect (QAHE) [19,20] in magnetic 3D-TIs (Bi1xCrx)2Te3. However, the microscopic mechanism that 
mediates long-range ferromagnetism in the surface state has not been fully established [18, 21-26]. A 
number of puzzling phenomena, such as a surface gap opening at a temperature Tc
2D much higher than 
the  onset  temperature  of  bulk  magnetization  Tc
3D  [15-17,22-25],  the  absence  of  gap  formation  by 
direct  surface  magnetic  doping  [27],  and  the  lack  of  direct  STS  evidence  for  either  magnetism-
induced surface gaps [30] or spectroscopic magnetic impurity resonances [21], all suggest that further 
investigation is needed.  
 
 
We report in this work direct evidence for magnetism-induced surface-state energy gaps and 
magnetic impurity resonances in 3D-TIs by STS studies of bilayer structures of Bi2Se3 and Cr-doped 
Bi2Se3.  The  bilayer  samples  were  grown  by  molecular  beam  epitaxy  (MBE)  on  InP  (111)  single 
crystalline substrates, with an updoped Bi2Se3 layer of varying thicknesses, d1 quintuple layers (QLs), 
on top of a Cr-doped Bi2Se3 layer of a fixed thickness d2 = 6-QL. These bilayer structures ensured that 
magnetism may be observed in the undoped Bi2Se3 through the proximity effect for sufficiently small 
d1 values, which prevented possible complications due to Cr-doping induced changes in the electronic 
bandstructures  of  Bi2Se3,  and  thus  enabled  direct  observation  of  the  effect  of  global  time-reversal 
symmetry breaking on the surface state of TIs.  Finally, we discuss the implications of our findings on 
applications  of  magnetically  doped  topological  insulators  to  spintronics  and  quantum  information 
technology. 
 
 
2. Methods 
 
The  samples  investigated in this  work  consisted of  MBE-grown  bilayer structures as schematically 
shown in figure 1(a), where d1 = 1, 3, 5, 7-QL for the 10% Cr-doping level, and d1 = 1-QL for 5% Cr-
doping. Hereafter we use the nomenclature (d1+d2)-x% to denote our samples. Details of the growth 
process, structural characterizations and ARPES studies of these bilayer samples have been reported 
elsewhere  [18,28,29].  Bulk  electrical  transport  measurements  on  these  samples  revealed  the 
appearance  of anomalous  Hall resistance at T ≤ Tc
3D ~ 30 K for x = 10% and ~ 20 K for x = 5%, 
respectively, as exemplified in figure 1(b). Additionally, surface magneto-optic Kerr effect (SMOKE) 
measurements have been performed on similar bilayer samples, showing finite Kerr angles K at T < 
Tc
3D,  with  temperature  and  magnetic  field  dependence  similar  to  those  of  the  anomalous  Hall 
resistance [18], as exemplified in supplementary figure 1(a)-(c).  
 

For the STM studies, each bilayer sample was capped with ~ 1 nm Se inside the MBE growth 
chamber  for  passivation  immediately  after  the  bilayer  growth.  The  sample  was  subsequently 
transferred from the growth chamber via a vacuum suitcase to another vacuum chamber, where the 
sample was annealed at 423 K ~ 473 K for 90 minutes under vacuum (< 105 Torr) to remove the Se 
capping  layer.  The  exposed  bilayer  sample  was  cooled  to  300  K  in  vacuum,  and  then  the  sample-
containing chamber was filled with Ar gas and loaded into an Ar-filled glove box, where the sample 
was removed from the chamber and transferred to the STM probe placed in the same glove box. The 
STM probe was sealed, transferred to its cryostat, and then evacuated down to ~ 1010 Torr at liquid 
helium temperatures. The variable temperature range achievable for our homemade STM system was 
from 300 K to ~ 10 K, and a superconducting magnet was available to provide magnetic fields up to ~ 
7 Tesla.  
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  1.  (a)  Schematics  of  the  side  view  of  a  Bi2Se3  bilayer  sample,  showing  an  undoped 
Bi2Se3 layer of a thickness d1-QL on top of a Cr-doped Bi2Se3 layer of a thickness 6-QL grown 
on InP (111). A gold contact was placed on top of d1. (b) Temperature dependent normalized 
Hall resistance (Rxy) of the Bi2Se3 bilayer samples at H = 0, with each set of data normalized to 
its maximum Hall resistance value (Rxy-Max). The Rxy-Max values are 1.35 , 1.26  and 0.32 
for  the  (3+6)-10%,  (1+6)-10%  and  (1+6)-5%  samples,  respectively.  The  Tc
3D  values  are 
estimated from the temperatures associated with the 1% values of Rxy-Max, which yield ~ 30 K, ~ 
30 K and ~ 20 K for the (3+6)-10%, (1+6)-10% and (1+6)-5% samples, respectively. 

 
3. Results and analysis 
 
In this work both topographic and spectroscopic studies were made on all samples as a function of T 
(from 300 K to 15 K) and H (from 0 to 3.5 Tesla) using the variable temperature STM.  
 
3.1. Structural characteristics from surface topographic studies 
 
The  surface  topography  on  large  scales  revealed  pyramid-like  terraces  with  steps  corresponding  to 
single atomic layers, as described previously [28,29]. For an averaged, nominal top layer thickness d1-
QL,  the  local  thickness  of  the  top  layer  could  vary  up  to  1-QL.  Atomically  resolved  topographic 
images exhibited triangular lattice patterns that were always consistent with that of pure Bi2Se3, as 
exemplified in figure 2(a) and figure 2(b) for (1+6)-10% and (5+6)-10% samples, respectively. On the 
other hand, the Fourier transformation (FT) of the surface topography appeared to be dependent on d1. 
We  found  that  FT  of  the  (1+6)-10%  topography  showed  an  expected  hexagonal  Bragg  diffraction 
pattern for Bi2Se3 plus an additional, faint superlattice structure (figure 2(c)), which may be attributed 
to the underlying Cr-doped Bi2Se3. For instance, a periodic substitution of Cr for Bi as exemplified in 
figure 2(f) for a two-dimensional projection of the two Bi-layers within one-QL yields a FT pattern 
(figure  2(e))  similar  to  that  in  figure  2(c).  This  superlattice  structure  corresponds  to  a  local  Cr 
concentration of 1/12. Another similar structure with a local Cr concentration of 1/8 (figure 2(h)) is 

also feasible within experimental uncertainties of the superlattice constant and its angle relative to the 
Bi lattice (figure 2(g)). In contrast, the FT in figure 2(d) for the surface topography of a (5+6)-10% 
sample only revealed the hexagonal diffraction pattern of pure Bi2Se3 due to the relatively thick d1 
layer. Interestingly, we note that the FT topography of the (1+6)-5% samples also agreed with figure 
2(d), suggesting random Cr substitutions of Bi for a smaller Cr concentration, which is consistent with 
the randomly distributed Cr clusters found with STM studies directly on 2% Cr-doped Bi2Se3 [30]. 
 
3.2. Zero-field spectroscopic studies 
 
For the zero-field studies, tunneling conductance (dI/dV) vs. biased voltage (V = E/e) measurements 
were carried out on each sample over multiple areas, followed by detailed analysis of the spatially 
resolved  spectral  characteristics.  While  apparent  spatial  variations  were  found  in  all  samples, 
systematic  investigations  led  to  several  general  findings.  First,  all  samples  revealed  gapless  Dirac 
tunneling  spectra  at  300  K.  Second,  with  decreasing  T  there  were  two  distinctly  different  types  of 
spectral  characteristics:  For  samples  with  nominal  d1  =  5  and  7,  the  tunneling  spectra  remained 
gapless for all T, except for occasional areas where the actual d1 values in the nominal d1 = 5 sample 
were ~ 4. In contrast, for samples with nominal d1 = 1 and 3, the majority spectra revealed gapped 
2D, and the temperature evolution for all samples are exemplified in figure 3 (a)-(d). 
features at T < Tc
Third, the surface gap (r,T), obtained by the spectral analysis illustrated in figure 3(e), appeared to 
be spatially inhomogeneous where r denotes the two-dimensional spatial coordinate.  
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(b) 

(d) 

(h) 

(e)

(g)

(f) 

Figure  2.  Structural  characteristics  of  MBE-grown  Bi2Se3  bilayer  samples  on  InP  (111):  (a) 
Surface  topography  of  a  (1+6)-10%  sample  over  an  area  of  (6×6)  nm2,  showing  a  triangular 
lattice  structure.  (b)  Surface  topography  of  a  (5+6)-10%  sample  over  an  area  of  (6×6)  nm2, 
showing  a  triangular  lattice.  (c)  Fourier  transformation  (FT)  of  the  surface  topography  in  a 
(1+6)-10% sample, revealing a dominant hexagonal reciprocal lattice structure and a secondary 
superlattice of a much weaker intensity, probably coming from the underlying Cr-doped Bi2Se3 
layer.  Here  “a”  in  the  reciprocal  space  scale  (2/a3)  refers  to  the  in-plane  nearest  neighbor 
distance between Bi (Se) and Bi (Se). (d) FT of the surface topography on a (5+6)-10% sample, 
showing a purely hexagonal reciprocal lattice. (e) Simulated FT of the 1/12 Cr-substituted Bi 
layer  illustrated  in  (f),  showing  a  FT  similar  the  data  in  (c).  Here  the  blue  dots  represent  Bi 
atoms and the red dots represent Cr substitutions. (g) Simulated FT of the 1/8 Cr-substituted Bi 
layer illustrated in (h), showing a FT also similar the data in (c) within experimental errors.  

 

For a given r,  mostly increased with decreasing T except near Tx ~ (110±10) K where a slight 
2D, as exemplified by the 

dip appeared, and eventually saturated to a maximum value at T < Tc

3D << Tc

, the onset T for the surface gap opening was found to be Tc

2D >> Tc

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

T evolution of the gap maps and the corresponding gap histograms in the left and middle panels of 
figure  4  (a)-(c)  for  the  (1+6)-5%,  (1+6)-10%  and  (3+6)-10%  samples,  and  also  summarized  in  the 
right panels for the temperature dependence of the corresponding mean gap   (T). Here the mean gap 
value    at a given T was determined from the peak value of Gaussian fitting to the gap histogram, 
and the errors were determined from the one sigma linewidth of the Gaussian fitting. Based on the 
)T
(
2D = (240 ± 10) K for x = 
data for
3D = 
10% and Tc
30 ~ 20 K obtained from the onset temperature of the anomalous Hall resistance. This finding of Tc
2D 
3D is in fact consistent with previous reports on other families of 3D-TIs [15-17]. As we shall 
>> Tc
elaborate further in Discussion, the non-monotonic temperature dependence of the surface gap and the 
3D may be the result of multiple magnetic interaction components in the bilayer 
relation of Tc
samples, with each component having a different temperature dependence and interaction range.   

2D = (210 ± 10) K for x = 5%, significantly higher than the bulk Curie temperatures Tc

(e)    dI/dV‐vs.‐Energy  

Figure 3. Temperature evolution of representative normalized tunneling conductance spectra of 
(d1 +d2)-x% bilayer samples taken at H = 0: (a) (1+6)-5%, (b) (1+6)-10%; (c) (3+6)-10%, and 
(d) (5+6)-10%. For samples with d1 = 1 and 3, each representative spectrum in (a)-(c) at a given 
T was determined by first taking the spatially resolved tunneling spectra over a fixed area of the 
sample, plotting the histogram of the gap values to determine the mean gap   over this area, 
and then averaging those spectra with gap values within one sigma of   . To compensate for the 
thermal drift of the STM tip and to ensure that the spectral analysis was carried out over the 
same sample area for all different temperatures, we compared the topographic images taken at 
all  temperatures  to  identify  the  overlapped  areas.  With  this  procedure,  finite  gaps  were 
consistently found to develop at low temperatures for samples with d1 = 1 and 3 as exemplified 
in (a)-(c), whereas all spectra were gapless for samples with d1 = 5 and 7, as exemplified in (d). 
(e)  Schematic  illustration  showing  how  the  gap  is  estimated  from  a  realistic  normalized 
tunneling  conductance  spectrum:  Defining  the  conductance  of  the  inflection  point  in  the 
tunneling spectrum as h and the corresponding energy difference between the spectral inception 
points  as  h,  we  identify  2h  for  the  tunneling  conductance  at  2h,  and  then  extrapolate  an 
effective gap at zero conductance from the formula = 2h 2h. The maximum gap thus 
obtained is consistent with the theoretical values (0.3 ~ 0.5 eV) from the densities of states of 
SeI,II in Cr-doped Bi2Se3 [30]. 

The  inhomogeneous  gap  distribution  may  be  attributed  to  multiple  reasons.  First,  the  Cr-
substitution of Bi may not be uniform due to the size mismatch, which could induce lattice strain and 
inhomogeneous ferromagnetism. Second, the magnetic moments of Cr ions may not be well aligned 
along  the  sample  c-axis  without  an  external  magnetic  field.  Given  that  only  c-axis  magnetization 
component can induce a surface gap in 3D-TIs according to Eqs. (1)-(2), varying spin alignments in 
different  magnetic  domains  would  result  in  varying  surface  gaps  [31].  Third,  the  sample  surface 
exhibited terrace structures with ~ 1-QL thickness variations [28], which could give rise to varying 
proximity-induced gaps from the RKKY interaction mediated by surface Dirac fermions [18,22-24]. 

 
To better understand how the aforementioned components contribute to the gap inhomogeneity, 
we  compare  the  surface  topography  of  the  bilayer  samples  with  their  corresponding  gap  maps.  As 
exemplified in supplementary figure 2(a)-(b) and discussed further in the supplementary information, 
we find that the correlation between a typical surface topography map and the corresponding gap map 
over  the  same  area  of  a  bilayer  sample  is  finite  although  relatively  weak.  The  weak  correlation  is 
primarily due to small height variations over the typical areas of our STM studies. Thus, the primary 
cause of spatially inhomogeneous gaps in the bilayer systems may be attributed to inhomogeneous Cr 
distributions and the misalignment of Cr magnetic moments. Experimentally, the latter effect may be 
minimized by applying a strong external magnetic field along the c-axis, which is the subject of our 
investigation in the next subsection. 

 
 

3.3. Finite-field spectroscopic studies 
 
We further investigated the effect of increasing c-axis magnetic field (H) on the gap distribution over 
the same area of each sample at a constant T. As exemplified in figure 5(a)-(f) for samples of (1+6)-
5% and (3+6)-10% taken at T = 18 K and H = 0, 1.5 T and 3.5 T, the gap maps became increasingly 
homogeneous  and  the  mean  gap  value     derived  from  the  histogram  also  increased  slightly  with 
increasing  H.  This  finding  suggests  that  the  observed  surface  gap  is  consistent  with  c-axis 
ferromagnetism induced by Cr-doping and proximity effect, and the characteristic field for saturating 
the surface state ferromagnetism appears to be larger than that for saturating the bulk ferromagnetism 
[18],  probably  due  to  the  helical  spin  textures  of  the  former.  The  small  but  finite  residual  gap 
inhomogeneity in high fields may be primarily attributed to spatially inhomogeneous Cr-distributions.  
 
 
3.4. Minority spectra 
 
While  the  majority  of  the  tunneling  spectra  in  the  (1+6)-5%,  (1+6)-10%  and  (3+6)-10%  samples 
revealed gapped characteristics for T < Tc
2D, spatially localized and intense conductance peaks were 
occasionally observed along the borders of gapless and gapped regions, as exemplified in figure 6 (a)-
(d)  for  a  (1+6)-5%  sample  and  in  figure  6  (f)  for  a  (1+6)-10%  sample.  These  long-lived  minority 
spectra either consisted of a single sharp conductance peak at a small negative energy E = E near the 
Dirac point ED; or comprised of double conductance peaks (figure 6(b)) at E = E and E = E+, where 
E+ is near the Fermi energy EF = 0. These double-peak spectral characteristics were consistent with 
theoretical  predictions  for  magnetic  impurity resonances  [25].  Further,  the  numbers  of  both  single- 
and double-peak impurity resonances at H = 0 were found to increase rapidly near Tc
2D (figure 6(f)). 
In  contrast,  all  resonances  disappeared  under  a  large  c-axis  magnetic  field  at  low  T  when  gapless 
regions diminished. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 4. Temperature evolution and spatial distribution of the surface gap at H = 0: (a) Gap 
maps and the corresponding histograms of a (1+6)-5% sample taken at T = 80 K (left panels) 
and T = 164 K (middle panels), and the T-dependence of the mean gap    (second right panel). 
(b) Gap map and the corresponding histograms of a (1+6)-10% sample taken at T = 79 K (left 
panels) and T = 153 K (middle panels), and the T-dependence of the mean gap    (third right 
panel). (c) Gap maps and the corresponding histograms of a (3+6)-10% sample taken at T = 20 
K (left panels) and T = 79 K (middle panels), and the T-dependence of the mean gap    (fourth 
right panel). The first right panel is a schematic illustration of the spatially varying electronic 
structure experienced by the tunneling current, showing the dominance of the surface state gap 
 over the bulk gap B in determining the measured spectral gap in STS. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 5. Evolution of the surface gap distribution at T = 18 K with applied c-axis magnetic 
field: (a-c) Gap maps (upper panels) and the corresponding gap histograms (lower panels) of a 
(1+6)-5% sample taken at H = 0, 1.5 T and 3.5 T over the same (47 × 47) nm2 area. (d-f) Gap 
maps  (upper  panels)  and  the  corresponding  gap  histograms  (lower  panels)  of  a  (3+6)-10% 
sample taken at H = 0, 1.5 T and 3.5 T over the same (24 × 24) nm2 area. 

We attribute the sharp impurity resonances to isolated Cr-impurities that were far away from 
neighboring Cr ions and probably had partially diffused from the d2-layer into the interfacial region, 
because they were only found in zero-field along the borders between gapless and gapped regions, 
and then disappeared under a large c-axis magnetic field when gapless regions diminished and long-
range ferromagnetism  was established.  The strongly non-monotonic temperature dependence of the 
number  of  impurity  resonances  at  H  =  0  (see  figure  6  (f))  may  be  understood  as  the  result  of 
weakening surface ferromagnetism near Tc
2D, so that more Cr-impurities became decoupled and acted 
like isolated impurities. The strong spatial localization and long lifetime of these magnetic impurity 
resonances at H = 0 may be attributed to topological protection of the surface state in 3D-TIs when 
the Dirac energy ED is relatively close to EF, similar to the case for non-magnetic impurities [25, 32].  

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6. Spectral characteristics of isolated magnetic impurities: (a) Gap map of a (1+6)-5% 
bilayer sample taken at T = 80 K and H = 0 over an area of (13×13) nm2, showing both spatially 
inhomogeneous gaps and some gapless regions (dark blue). The arrow indicates a site where a 
spatially  localized  double-resonant  spectrum  in  (b)  is  observed.  (b)  Sharp  resonances  of  an 
isolated impurity are manifested in the (dI/dV) vs. E and X plot, where X is a horizontal linecut 
across  an  isolated  impurity  indicated  by  the  arrow  in  (c).  The  sharp  double  resonant  peaks 
appear at E = E and E = E+, where E is near ED and E+ is near EF. (c) Tunneling conductance 
map taken at E = E over the same area as in (a), showing spatially isolated conductance peaks 
in  bright  sharp  spots.  (d)  Two-dimensional  distribution  of  the  tunneling  conductance  at  bias 
voltage V = (E/e) over a (4×4) nm2 area indicated by the dashed box in (c), showing three sites 
with intense impurity resonances. (e) Schematics of a topological defect (red arrows of opposite 
helicity)  due  to  an  isolated  magnetic  impurity  in  the  surface-state  Dirac  spin  textures 
(counterclockwise black arrows). (f) T-evolution of the counts of single- and double-peak and 
total impurity resonances over a (20×20) nm2 area of a (1 + 6)-10% sample, showing a rapid 
increase in the number of impurity resonances near Tc
2D for both the single- and double-peak 
resonances. 

We further remark that our finding of atomically sharp impurity resonances due to isolated Cr 
ions differs from direct STM studies of bare 2% Cr-doped Bi2Se3 [30]: In the latter case, direct atomic 
imaging revealed that Cr substituted Bi in clusters so that the resulting spectroscopy did not behave 
like  isolated  magnetic  impurities  embedded  in  the  surface  state  of  pure  Bi2Se3.  In  contrast,  our 
identification of isolated Cr-impurities in the bilayer systems was solely based on spatially resolved 
spectroscopic evidences without directly imaging the Cr impurities, because Cr ions could not diffuse 
all  the  way  to  the  top  surface  and  were  still  buried  by  the  undoped  Bi2Se3  layer.  Therefore,  STM 
imaging of all bilayer samples always revealed the atomic structure of pure Bi2Se3, as exemplified in 
figure 2 (a) - (b). Additionally, we have found no evidences for the formation of Cr clusters at the 
interface  of  our  bilayer  samples:  The  STEM  studies  [18]  of  typical  bilayer  samples  revealed 
atomically  sharp  interfaces  without  any  cluster-induced  variations  in  the  c-axis  lattice  spacing;  our 
bilayer samples also exhibited well defined 3D ferromagnetism below an appreciable Tc
3D (20 ~ 30 
K),  which  was  consistent  with  more  dispersed  and  uniform  distributions  of  Cr  in  order  to  achieve 
long-range ferromagnetic order. The latter situation was in stark contrast to the absence of long-range 
ferromagnetism down to 1.5 K in the 2% Cr-doped Bi2Se3 sample that exhibited randomly distributed 
surface Cr-clusters [30]. In fact, a recent report based on direct STM studies on a similar TI system 
(Bi0.1Sb0.9)1.92Cr0.08Te3  (with  Tc
3D  ~  18  K  and  4%  Cr-doping)  revealed  completely  dispersed 
distributions  of  Cr  and  inhomogeneous  gaps  without  evidences  for  cluster  formation  [33].  These 
findings  are  consistent  with  what  we  have  inferred  from  our  experimental  studies  of  the  (Bi1-
xCrx)2Se3/Bi2Se3 bilayer systems.     
 

4. Discussion 
 
In this session we address issues associated with the physical mechanism for proximity magnetism, 
the physical origin and the magnitude of the surface energy gap, the feasibility of high surface Tc
2D 
values relative to the bulk Tc
3D, and the topological spin textures in the presence of isolated magnetic 
impurities.       
 
4.1. Proximity magnetism in the bilayer system 
 
Our experimental results have demonstrated that the dependence of the spectral characteristics on T, 
H, x and d1 for the bilayer samples are all consistent with the scenario that a surface-state gap was 
induced  by  the  proximity  effect  of  predominantly  c-axis  ferromagnetism  in  the  Cr-doped  bottom 
layer. The appearance (absence) of gapped tunneling spectra below Tc
2D for bilayer samples with d1 ≤ 
3-QL (d1  5-QL) suggests that the proximity effect due to c-axis magnetic correlation is limited to a 
critical thickness dc ~ 4-QL. 
 

 

In our investigation of the Cr-doped bilayer system, it is important to realize that the undoped 
Bi2Se3  layer  should  not  be  considered  as  an  isolated  ultrathin  film  on  a  “substrate”  of  Cr-doped 
Bi2Se3. This realization is because of the continuous and seamless growth of undoped Bi2Se3 layer on 
top of the isostructure, Cr-doped Bi2Se3 layer [18], leading to an effective total thickness of (d1+d2)-
QL.  In  contrast,  for  ultra-thin  TI  films  on  dissimilar  substrates,  an  energy gap  can open  up  due to 
coupling  between  the  top  and  bottom  topological  surface  states,  and  a  Rashba-like  coupling  with 
further energy splitting in momentum can also be expected due to the asymmetric chemical potentials 
between the surface of the thin film and its interface with a dissimilar substrate [34]. This Rashba-like 
coupling has indeed been confirmed by ARPES and STS studies for 2-QL to 5-QL Bi2Se3 on various 
dissimilar substrates [35, 36]. In particular, the energy gap induced by the Rashba-like coupling for 
ultra-thin TI films on dissimilar substrates does not exhibit any discernible temperature or magnetic 
field  dependence,  which  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  behavior  of  the  proximity-magnetism  induced 
surface gaps described in this work. 
 

Having established proximity magnetism as the physical origin of the surface gap in the bilayer 
system, we consider next the primary components that contribute to the surface ferromagnetism in the 

2D >> Tc

3D.     

undoped  Bi2Se3  layer  of  d1  ≤  3-QL.  A  natural  component  is  the  dipole  fields  associated  with  the 
magnetic moments of Cr ions. Additionally, RKKY-like magnetic interactions mediated by the bulk 
carriers and the surface Dirac fermions are also feasible contributions to the surface ferromagnetism. 
Therefore, we may express the effective ferromagnetic coupling constant Jeff in terms of the sum of 
these three components, Jeff = (Jdipole + Jbulk) + JDirac, where (Jdipole + Jbulk)  J3D may be considered as a 
3D  component  and  JDirac    J2D  a  2D  component.  We  expect  J3D  to  vary  slowly  with  d1  because  it 
primarily  represents  the  bulk  magnetic  properties  of  the  Cr-doped  Bi2Se3.  In  contrast,  J2D    exp 
(2d1/dc)  is  strongly  dependent  on  d1  because  it  involves  the  wavefunction  overlaps  between  the 
surface Dirac fermions of the undoped Bi2Se3 layer and those of the d-electrons in Cr-doped Bi2Se3 
layer [18, 22-24].  

 
Concerning the temperature dependence of Jeff, we expect J3D to dominate at low T because of 
the  strong  confinement  of  Dirac  fermions  to  the  surface  layer  and  therefore  negligible  RKKY 
interaction between surface Dirac fermions and bulk d-electrons. On the other hand, J3D is sensitive to 
3D  long-range  order  of  magnetic  moments  and  so  should  diminish  significantly  above  Tc
3D.  In 
contrast, finite temperature can enhance wavefunction overlaps between the surface Dirac fermions 
and  the  interfacial  d-electrons.  Therefore,  we  expect J2D  to  dominate  at  elevated  temperatures,  and 
have further elaborated our rationale for this temperature dependence in Supplementary Information. 
Moreover,  the  long  Fermi  wavelength  of  surface  Dirac  fermions  could  result  in  much  enhanced 
RKKY  interaction  in  the  bilayer  system  so  that  J2D  >  J3D  [18,  22-24],  which  may  account  for  the 
empirical observation of Tc
 
4.2. The magnitude and temperature dependence of the surface gap 
 

Based  on  the  scenario  described  above  and  noting  that  the  proximity-induced  surface  gap  is 
given by  = (JeffM) where M is the surface magnetization that increases monotonically below Tc
2D, 
2D) can indeed exhibit a non-monotonic T-
we find that with decreasing T, the surface gap  (T < Tc
dependence  that  is  consistent  with  our  experimental  findings  depicted  in  figure  4.  As  qualitatively 
exemplified in supplementary figure 3,  (T) first increases with decreasing T for T < Tc
2D, and then 
exhibits a “dip” at Tx where Tc
3D, and Tx represents a dimensional crossover temperature 
below  which  J2D  becomes  negligible.  While  we  do  not  have  sufficient  information  to  model  (T) 
quantitatively, the qualitative agreement of supplementary figure 3 with experimental results in figure 
4  suggests  that  our  proposed  scenario  for  proximity  magnetism  in  the  bilayer  system  may  provide 
useful guide for future investigation.      

2D > Tx > Tc

 
Next, we comment on the magnitude of the proximity-induced surface gaps in Bi2Se3, which 
were found to be comparable or even larger than the bulk gap (~ 0.3 eV) of Bi2Se3. While one may 
question  whether  it  is  feasible  for  a  magnetism-induced  surface  gap  to  exceed  its  bulk  gap  of  a 
topological insulator, we point out that the bulk gap ~ 0.3 eV of Bi2Se3 is an indirect gap; the direct 
gap at the -point where the Dirac cone resides is in fact > 0.5 eV based on bandstructure calculations 
[37]. In this context, the largest mean gap values (0.4 eV ~ 0.5 eV) found in our work are well within 
the range of the bulk gap. We further note that the gap values determined from STS studies would be 
dominated  by  the  local  gap  of  the  surface  layer,  whereas  the  gap  value  determined  from  ARPES 
would  be  sensitive  to  the  smallest  gap  over  an  extended  surface  area.  Therefore,  the  surface  gap 
determined  from  STS  tends  to  be  larger  than  that  determined  from  ARPES  for  an  inhomogeneous 
sample. Indeed, ARPES studies on Bi1.8Cr0.2Se3 have revealed a surface gap of ~ 0.2 eV [18], which is 
slightly smaller than but still in reasonable agreement with our finding of  = (0.25 ± 0.09) eV for a 
(1+6)-10% sample at H = 0 and T = 79 K, as shown in Fig. 4(b).   
 
4.3. The feasibility of a much higher surface Tc

2D than the bulk Tc

 
Concerning the physical feasibility of a relatively high Tc

2D, we note that the energy splitting of 
the  double-peak  spectrum  associated  with  isolated  magnetic  impurities  in  the  surface  state  is 

3D 

2D and Tc

2D ~ 240 K for x = 10% and Tc

comparable to the effective ferromagnetic coupling constant Jeff [21]. Noting that the mean-field Curie 
2D ~ S(S+1)(Jeff/3) [38] and that Jeff ~ 0.1 
temperature may be estimated from Jeff via the relation kBTc
eV as determined from the measured energy splitting of the double resonances, we obtain Tc
2D ~ 250 
K by assuming S = 1/2. While this rough estimate does not include the screening effect from Dirac 
fermions, it is still comparable to our STS measurements of Tc
2D~ 210 K 
3D~ 25 K. The 
for x = 5% for the observed surface ferromagnetism, and is much higher than the bulk Tc
disparity of Tc
3D may be attributed to the different microscopic mechanisms for mediating 
ferromagnetism  via  the  surface-state  Dirac  fermions  versus  via  the  bulk-state  carriers,  particularly 
given the diverging Fermi wavelength of the Dirac fermions when the Fermi energy approaches the 
Dirac point [18, 22-24]. While quantitative details of the microscopic mechanism responsible for Tc
2D 
>>  Tc
2D  values  are  promising  for  realistic 
spintronic applications, particularly if our findings may be generalized to more homogeneously Cr-
doped 3D-TIs such as (Bi1xCrx)2Te3 [18]. 
 
4.4. Topological spin textures  
 

3D  require  further  investigation,  the  relatively  high  Tc

The appearance of both single- and double-peak magnetic impurity resonances is suggestive of 
two  types  of  topological  defects  associated  with  an  isolated  magnetic  impurity:  The  single-peak 
resonance may be attributed to a helical Dirac spin texture coupling to a magnetic moment pointing 
along  the  c-axis,  whereas  the  double-peak  resonance  is  associated  with  two  opposite  chiral  spin 
textures of Dirac fermions coupling to an in-plane magnetic moment [21], as illustrated in figure 6 (e). 
Our assignment of the single-peak resonances in this work to the helical Dirac spin texture coupled 
with  isolated  c-axis  magnetic  moments  can  be  justified  by  their  strong  and  non-monotonic 
temperature  dependence  near  Tc
2D  (figure  6  (f)),  and  also  by  their  suppression  under  large  c-axis 
magnetic fields. In contrast, our previous studies of non-magnetic impurity resonances in pure Bi2Se3 
MBE-grown  thin  films  [32]  did  not  find  any  dependence  of  their  occurrences  on  either  the 
temperature  or  the  applied  magnetic  field,  implying  that  the  physical  origin  of  the  single-peak 
resonances in pure Bi2Se3 is fundamentally different from that of the single-peak resonances observed 
in the bilayer systems.  

 
Our  finding  of  occurrences  of  impurity  resonances  only  along  the  borders  of  gapped  and 
gapless regions is consistent with suppressed long-range magnetic order along the boundaries between 
the c-axis oriented (gapped) and in-plane oriented (gapless) magnetic domains [31]. Thus, proximity-
induced  magnetization  in  the  top  Bi2Se3  layer  is  also  much  suppressed  for  regions  above  the 
boundaries of c-axis and in-plane magnetic domains [31], and Cr-ions located in these regions were 
more  likely  to  decouple  from  long-range  magnetization  and  became  effectively  isolated  magnetic 
impurities,  particularly  with  the  assistance  of  thermal  fluctuations  at  sufficiently  high  temperatures 
(figure 6 (f)).     

Finally, we note that the spin textures associated with an in-plane magnetic impurity may be 
considered as a stable “topological bit” with two levels associated with the two opposite spin chirality. 
In principle, for a completely isolated topological bit, the two-level states may be tuned by a local c-
axis  magnetic  field.  Further,  for  EF    ED  these  topological  bits  are  long-lived  as  the  result  of 
topological protection. On the other hand, tuning EF away from ED will result in increasing coupling 
among  spatially  separated  topological  bits  [21],  which  may  be  viewed  as  inducing  an  effective 
entanglement of wavefunctions among these topological bits. The feasibility of tuning the two levels 
within a topological bit by an external magnetic field and the coupling among spatially separated bits 
by gating the Fermi level may present an interesting opportunity for applying these topological bits to 
quantum information technology. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

2D >> Tc

3D  <<  T  <  Tc

2D > 200 K, and the value of Tc

5. Conclusion 
 
We  have demonstrated scanning tunneling spectroscopic  evidences for  magnetism-induced  massive 
Dirac  spectra  and  topological  defects  in  the  surface  state  of  MBE-grown  3D-TIs  that  consisted  of 
bilayers of undoped Bi2Se3 on top of Cr-doped Bi2Se3. For an undoped layer thinner than or equal to 
3-QL, proximity-induced ferromagnetism was manifested by the appearance of a surface gap  below 
a transition temperature Tc
2D was found to be Cr-doping (x) dependent 
and also much higher than the bulk ferromagnetic transition temperature Tc
3D (<~ 30 K). Our finding 
of Tc
3D may be attributed to the much longer range of the RKKY interaction mediated by the 
surface Dirac fermions relative to that mediated by the bulk itinerant carriers.  The gap  distribution 
was spatially inhomogeneous, and its average value and spatial homogeneity at low T increased with 
H  and  x,  confirming  its  magnetic  origin.  On  the  other  hand,  the  non-monotonic  T-dependence  of 
may be attributed to proximity magnetism induced by two types of contributions: a 3D contribution 
from the bulk magnetism that dominates at low T, and a 2D contribution associated with the RKKY 
interactions  mediated  by  surface  Dirac  fermions,  which  dominates  at  Tc
2D.  The 
appearance of a gap below Tc
2D is the result of global time-reversal symmetry breaking in the surface 
state  of topological insulators. This global effect is in contrast to  the local time reversal  symmetry 
breaking  associated  with  isolated  magnetic  impurities  in  the  surface  state,  which  tends  to  induce 
excess densities of states near the Dirac point. Finally, topological defects associated with helical spin 
textures of Dirac fermions around isolated magnetic impurities were manifested as long-lived sharp 
double-peak spectral resonances along the borders of gapped and gapless regions. The strong spatial 
localization and long life-time of these magnetic impurity resonances represent interesting topological 
bits that are potentially useful for applications to quantum information technology. 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
This work at Caltech was jointly supported by DARPA and NSF. The work at UCLA was supported 
by  DARPA.  We  thank  Professors  Gabriel  Aeppli,  Alexei  Kitaev,  Nai-Phaun  Ong  and  Thomas 
Rosenbaum for useful discussions. 
 
 
References 
 
[1] Wen X-G 1995 Adv. Phys. 44 405 
[2] Qi X L and Zhang S-C 2011 Rev. Modern Phys. 83 1057 
[3] Hasan M Z and Kane C L 2010 Rev. Modern Phys. 82 3045 
[4] Kane C L and Mele E J 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 146802 
[5] Kane C L and Mele E J 2005 Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 226801 
[6] Bernevig B A and Zhang S-C 2006 Phys.Rev. Lett. 96 106802 
[7] Fu L and Kane C L 2007 Phys. Rev. B 76 045302 
[8] Qi X L, Hughes T L and Zhang S-C 2008 Phys. Rev. B 78 195424 
[9] Fu L and Kane C L 2008 Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 096407 
[10] Fu L and Kane C L 2009 Phys. Rev. B 79 161408(R) 
[11] Qi X-L, Li R, Zhang J and Zhang S-C 2009 Science 323 1184 
[12] Nomura K and Nagaosa N 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 166802 
[13] Qi X-L, Wu Y S and Zhang S-C 2006 Phys. Rev. B 74 085308 
[14] Alicea J 2012 Rep. Prog. Phys. 75 076501 
[15] Chen Y L et al. 2010 Science 329 659 
[16] Wray L A et al. 2011 Nat. Phys. 7 32 
[17] Xu S Y et al. 2012 Nat. Phys. 8 616 
[18] Kou X et al. 2013 Nano Lett. 13 4587 
[19] Yu R W et al. 2010 Science 329 61 
[20] Chang C-Z et al. 2013 Science 340 167 
[21] Biswas R R and Balatsky A V 2010 Phys. Rev. B 81 233405 
[22] Liu Q, Liu C X, Xu C K, Qi X L, Zhang S C 2009 Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 155506 
[23] Zhu J J, Yao D X, Zhang S C, Chang K 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 097201 

[24] Abanin D A and Pesin D A 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 13. 
[25] Rosenberg G and Franz M 2012 Phys. Rev. B 85 195119 
[26] Black-Schaffer A M, Balatsky A V and Fransson J 2015 Phys. Rev. B 91 201411R 
[27] Scholz M R et al. 2012 Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 256810 
[28] He L et al. 2013 Phys. Status Solidi RRL 7 50 
[29] Lang M et al. 2012 Nano Lett. 13 48  
[30] Chang C-Z et al. 2014 Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 056801  
[31] Lang M et al. 2014 Nano Lett. 14 3459 
[32] Teague M-L et al., 2012 Solid State Comm. 152 747 
[33] Lee I et al. 2015 Proc. Nat. Aca. Sci. 112 1316 
[34] Shan W Y, Lu H-Z and Shen S-Q, 2010 New J. Phys. 12 043048 
[35] Zhang Y et al. 2010 Nat. Phys. 6 584 
[36] Yeh N-C et al. 2012 EPJ Web of Conferences 23 00021 
[37] Zhang H et al. 2009 Nat. Phys. 5 438 
[38] Kittel C Introduction to Solid State Physics Eighth edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (2004), USA. ISBN 0-

471-41526-X 

  

 

 

USA 

Magnetism-induced  massive  Dirac  spectra  and  topological  defects  in  the 
surface state of Cr-doped Bi2Se3-bilayer topological insulators 
 
C.-C. Chen1,2, M. L. Teague1,2, L. He3, X. Kou3, M. Lang3, W. Fan1, N. Woodward1, K.-L. Wang3 
and N.-C. Yeh1,2,4* 
 
1 Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
2 Institute of Quantum Matter and Information, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, 

3 Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 
4 Kavli Nanoscience Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 
* E-mail: ncyeh@caltech.edu 
 
Supplementary Information 
 
The supplementary information includes the following figures and related information: 
 
Supplementary Figure 1: SMOKE measurement of Cr-doped monolayer and bilayer topological 

insulators 

 
Supplementary Figure 2: Correlation between the surface topography and the gap maps of the 

Cr-doped TI bilayer samples 

 
Supplementary  Figure  3:  Temperature  dependent  2D  and  3D  contributions  to  the  proximity-

induced surface gap in Cr-doped TI bilayer systems 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  Surface Magneto-Optic Kerr Effect (SMOKE) measurements of Cr-doped monolayer 

and bilayer topological insulators 
 

 
 

Details  of  the  experimental  setup  and  data  analysis  of  the  SMOKE  measurements  have  been 
described in Nano Lett. 13, 4587 (2013). Briefly, the experimental setup used elliptical polarized 
reflected light to probe the magnetic properties of materials. The SMOKE system was integrated 
with a temperature-controlled cryostat to achieve cryogenic temperatures down to 2.8 K. 

 
The SMOKE measurements involve spatially averaged signals over large areas (10’s ~ 100’s 
of m2), which are about five to six orders of magnitude larger than the typical areas investigated 
by  our  local-probe  STM  studies.  Because  of  the  large-area  averaged  effect,  finite  SMOKE 
signals  can  only  arise  from  non-vanishing  net  ferromagnetic  signals  over  the  areas  studied. 
Therefore, for randomly oriented magnetic domains plus inhomogeneity within each magnetic 
domains  as  seen  by  our  local-probe  STM  experiments  at  T  <  Tc2D,  the  SMOKE  signal  would 
essentially  average  to  zero  for  Tc3D  <  T  <  Tc2D.  On  the  other  hand,  when  T  <  Tc3D,  clear 
manifestation of the Kerr angle  K and the anomalous Hall resistance have been verified, and 
these results have also been discussed in detail in Nano Lett. 13, 4587 (2013). Here we include 
experimental  results  taken  on  a  similar  bilayer  system  (with  Tc3D  ~  25  K  and  the 
magnetoresistance  and  anomalous  Hall  resistance  results  all  consistent  with  the  Bi2Se3/Bi2-
2xCr2xSe3 bilayer system studied in this work) of d1-thickness of (Bi0.5Sb0.5)2Te3 (d1 = 0, 3, 6-QL) 
on top of 6-QL Cr0.08(Bi0.57Sb0.39)2Te3, as illustrated below in Supplementary Figure 1. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary  Figure  1  Temperature-dependent  SMOKE  measurement  of  Cr-doped 
monolayer and bilayer topological insulators:  (a-c) Out-of-plane magnetizations (reflected in 
Hc) measured by a polar-mode SMOKE setup. All of the modulation-doped samples have the 
same 6-QL Cr0.16(Bi0.54Sb0.38)2Te3 bottom d2-layer, with different top d1-layer thicknesses (with 
d1 = 0, 3 and 6-QL). The largest magnetization is produced in the 3-QL TI/6-QL Cr-doped TI 
structure,  which  is  consistent  with  the  transport  measurements  and  has  been  explained  by  a 
model based on RKKY interaction mediated by surface Dirac fermions, as discussed in detail in 
Nano Lett. 13, 4587 (2013). 
 
 

2.  Correlation  between  the  surface  topography  and  the  gap  maps  of  the  Cr-doped  TI 

bilayer samples 
 

The spatially inhomogeneous surface gap found in Cr-doped TI bilayer structures with d1 ≤ 3-QL 
has  been  attributed  to  three  factors,  including  inhomogeneous  Cr  distributions,  unaligned 
magnetic  moments  of  Cr,  and  height  variations  in  the  MBE-grown  TI  bilayer  samples  as  the 
result of terrace-like structures.  
 

To investigate how much the height variation may influence the surface gap distribution, 
we directly compare the topographic map and the gap map of a Cr-doped bilayer sample, (3+6)-
10%, as shown in Supplementary Figure 2. We calculate the mean of the correlation function C 
between the two maps by the following relation: 

  

 

C



 

 


m n
,

A
mn

m n
,









A
mn
A




A B

2

 



m n
,

mn



B


B
mn




 . 

B

2






b

a 

Here  the  subscripts  m,  n  refer  to  the  pixel  indices  of  the  “A”  and  “B”  maps  that  respectively 
correspond to the surface topography and the surface gap taken on the same sample and in the 
same area, whereas  A ( B ) denotes the mean value of the entire surface topography (surface gap) 
map.  We  found  that  the  maps  shown  in  Supplementary  Figure  2  yield  C    0.08,  which 
corresponds  to  weak  correlation.  In  general,  C  =  1  implies  perfect  correlation,  1  implies 
perfect anti-correlation, and 0 implies no correlation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Figure 2 Comparison of the surface topography and the gap map of the 
same area in a bilayer sample (3+6)-10% at H = 0: (a) Surface topography over a (24×24) nm2 
area. (b) The gap map of the same area as in (a).The correlation C calculated using the relation 
specified above for the two maps is found to be 0.08, suggesting weak correlation.  
 
 
 

3.  Temperature dependent 2D and 3D contributions to the proximity-induced surface gap 

in Cr-doped TI bilayer systems 
 

We assume that the proximity-induced surface gap is given by  = (JeffM) where M is the surface 
magnetization  that  increases  monotonically  below  Tc2D,  and  Jeff  is  the  ferromagnetic  coupling 
constant  with  both  contributions  from  the  3D  components  (Jdipole  +  Jbulk)    J3D  and  the  2D 
component  JDirac   J2D associated with surface Dirac fermion-mediated RKKY interaction. As 
discussed in the manuscript and further elaborated in the end of this section, we expect J3D to 
dominate  at  low  T  and  J2D  to  dominate  at  elevated  temperatures.  Moreover,  the  long  Fermi 
wavelength of surface Dirac fermions could result in much enhanced RKKY interaction in the 
bilayer system so that J2D > J3D. 
 

Based  on  the  aforementioned  assumption,  the  surface  gap    (T  <  Tc2D)  is  expected  to 
exhibit  a  non-monotonic  T-dependence,  which  is  consistent  with  our  experimental  findings 
depicted in figure 4:   (T) first increases with decreasing T for T < Tc2D, and then exhibits a 
“dip” at Tx where Tc2D > Tx > Tc3D, and Tx is a dimensional crossover temperature below which 
JDirac  becomes  negligible.  While  we  do  not  have  sufficient  information  to  model  (T) 
quantitatively, we demonstrate in Supplementary Figure 3 how the qualitative T-dependence of 
Jeff and M proposed in Subsection 4.1 of the manuscript yields non-monotonic -vs.-T behavior 
similar to the empirical results in figure 4.  

 
In order to qualitatively emulate the aforementioned T-dependence of J2D, J3D, Jeff and M, 

we employ the following functional forms 

 
we find that for T < Tx, the T-dependence of Jeff is largely determined by that of J3D, whereas for 
Tx < T < Tc2D, the T-dependence of Jeff is largely determined by that of J2D. Further, the surface 
gap also exhibits a non-monotonic T-dependence with a minimum at Tx. 
 

 
            

eff



J






M T T
2D
c
J


T






T

J




T M T



T

J

2D

eff

J



T



2D



J

2D exp
0


1

;  



T
3D
T
2D
c
T





M
0







T T
2D
c


; 
3/2





; 








;

M T T
2D
c









0;

 

J



T



3D



J

0



J

0
3D

exp










T
T
3D
c

2










. 

 

Using the above functional forms and the parameters:  
 

M

0



1,

J

0
2D



1,

J

0
3D



0.315,

J

0



0.1,

 

 
 

Although the functional forms given above can produce a non-monotonic T-dependence 
of  that is in reasonable agreement with empirical results, we caution that one should not over-
interpret the physical significance of the specific functional forms given above because of too 
many  parameters  that  can  only  be  determined  from  knowing  the  microscopic  details.  Further 
theoretical  studies  will  be  necessary  to  fully  understand  the  temperature  dependence  of  the 
proximity-induced surface gap.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary  Figure  3  Temperature  (T)  dependent  2D  and  3D  contributions  to  the 
proximity-induced surface gap in the Cr-doped TI bilayer system. (a) Schematic temperature 
(T) dependence of the ferromagnetic coupling constant Jeff that consists of a 3D component J3D 
that dominates at low T, and a 2D component J2D that dominates at higher temperatures. The 
specific functional forms for J3D and J2D are given in the text. (b) Schematic T-dependence of the 
surface magnetization M, with the specific functional form specified in the text. (c) The surface 
gap  = Jeff M reveals a non-monotonic T-dependence, consistent with our experimental findings 
shown in figure 4 and reproduced in (d) for a (1+6)-5% sample. 
 
 

Finally, we discuss our rationale for a dominant J2D at elevated temperatures. First of all, 
we note that the wavefunction of Dirac fermions may be expressed as a linear combination of 
orthonormal  eigenfunctions  of  the  Hamiltonian.  While  the  eigenfunctions  are  independent  of 
temperature, the wavefunction distribution among the eigenfunctions is certainly a function of 
temperature.  In  addition,  the  RKKY  interaction  associated  with  J2D  must  involve  spatially 
extended  electronic  wavefunctions  along  the  c-axis,  and  the  spatial  extension  unavoidably 
involves multiple atomic layers so that thermally assisted processes (e.g., assisted by phonons or 
impurity states in the bulk) similar to the case of variable-range-hopping conductivity are likely. 
In this context, higher temperatures could effectively reduce the hopping barrier and enhance the 
RKKY interaction mediated by the surface Dirac fermions. More specifically, we note that at 
elevated temperatures the electronic wavefunctions of surface Dirac fermions will involve not 
only  the  ground-state  eigenfunction  (which  is  confined  to  2D)  but  also  the  excited-state 
eigenfunctions  (which  could  extend  beyond  2D).  Therefore,  any  interaction  matrix  element 
involving  the  surface  Dirac  fermions  will  also  be  temperature  dependent.  In  particular,  if  the 
interaction involves phonon-assisted processes, more significant temperature dependence may be 
expected. 

 
Empirically, there are two pieces of evidences for strong temperature dependence in the 
electronic contributions of Dirac fermions, which could be considered as indirectly support for 
our  conjecture  of  temperature  dependence  in  the  2D  RKKY  interaction  mediated  by  Dirac 
fermions. The first piece of evidence was associated with the observation of quantum anomalous 
Hall  effect  (QAHE)  by  C-Z  Chang  et  al.  in  Science  340,  167  (2013):  While  theoretical 
predictions  for  the  occurrence  of  QAHE  based  on  purely  topological  nature  of  the  magnetic 
topological insulators would have only required the sample temperature to be sufficiently lower 
than the Curie temperature ~ 15 K, empirically QAHE could only be observed at T ~ 30 mK; 
slight increase of the temperature to T ~ 90 mK already caused significant deviations from the 
ideal  behavior  of  QAHE.  Although  there  has  been  no  theoretical  account  for  this  unexpected 
temperature dependence of the QAHE in topological insulators, the empirical finding strongly 
suggests the relevance of temperature to the electronic contributions of Dirac fermions so that 
increasing temperature could change the 2D characteristics of Dirac fermions in the ground state 
to more 3D like in the excited states, thus diminishing the QAHE for a strictly 2D system.  

 
The second piece of evidence came from our detailed temperature dependent studies of 
topological insulator films [L. He et al., Nano Letters 12, 1486 (2012)], which revealed that the 
electrical conductivity of topological insulators was dominated by the surface conductance only 
at  sufficiently  low  temperatures;  at  intermediate  temperatures  both  surface  and  bulk 
contributions  were  relevant,  and  then  at  high  temperatures  bulk  effects  dominated.  Thus,  the 
electronic  contributions  of  the  surface  Dirac  fermions  in  topological  insulators  appear  to  be 
strongly dependent on the temperature, which imply that the 2D RKKY interaction mediated by 
the surface Dirac fermions in our bilayer system would also be temperature dependent.      

 
In summary, to achieve proximity-induced surface ferromagnetism in our bilayer systems 
through  the  2D  RKKY  interaction  mediated  by  the  surface  Dirac  fermions,  the  electronic 
wavefunctions of the surface Dirac fermions must extend beyond the surface layer. While the 
mechanism(s)  that  mediate  the  spread  of  wavefunctions  are  not  clear  yet,  possible  physical 
mechanisms such as phonon and/or impurity-states assisted hopping are all strongly temperature 

dependent. Empirically it has also been shown that the electronic contributions of surface Dirac 
fermions to such phenomena as the QAHE and electrical conductivity reveal strong temperature 
dependence,  suggesting  that  the  wavefunctions of surface Dirac fermions in the excited states 
differ significantly from those in the ground state. Consequently, it is feasible to suggest that the 
magnetic coupling coefficient J2D that involves the surface Dirac fermions is also temperature 
dependent,  with  negligible  contributions  at  low  temperatures  due  to  strongly  surface-confined 
electronic wavefunctions in the ground state and thus diminished wavefunction overlaps with the 
underlying Cr atoms. 

