
High field response of gated graphene at THz frequencies

Hadi Razavipour, Wayne Yang, Abdeladim Guermoune, Michael Hilke, and David G. Cooke∗

Department of Physics, McGill University, Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada

Department of Physics, Engineering Physics and Astronomy, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada

Ibraheem Al-Naib and Marc M. Dignam

D´epartement de g´enie ´Electrique, ´Ecole de technologie sup´erieure, Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada

Fran¸cois Blanchard

Hassan A. Hafez, Xin Chai, Denis Ferachou, and Tsuneyuki Ozaki

INRS-EMT, Advanced Laser Light Source, Varennes, Qu´ebec, Canada

D´epartement de Chimie, Universit´e de Montr´eal, Montr´eal, Qu´ebec, Canada

Pierre L´evesque and Richard Martel

We study the Fermi energy level dependence of nonlinear terahertz (THz) transmission of gated
multi-layer and single-layer graphene transferred onto sapphire and quartz substrates. The two
samples represent two limits of low-field impurity scattering: short-range neutral and long-range
charged impurity scattering, respectively. We observe an increase in the transmission as the field
amplitude is increased due to intraband absorption bleaching starting at fields above 8 kV/cm. This
effect arises from a field-induced reduction in THz conductivity that depends strongly on the Fermi
energy. We account for intraband absorption using a free carrier Drude model that includes neutral
and charged impurity scattering as well as optical phonon scattering. We find that although the
Fermi-level dependence in the monolayer and five-layer samples is quite different, both exhibit a
strong dependence on the field amplitude that cannot be explained on the basis of an increase in
the lattice temperature alone. Our results provide a deeper understanding of transport in graphene
devices operating at THz frequencies and in modest kV/cm field strengths where nonlinearities
exist.

PACS numbers: 78.67.Wj, 72.20.Ht, 78.67.-n, 72.80.Vp

I.

INTRODUCTION

gate which is transmissive to THz light (see Fig. 1).

The well known linear electronic dispersion of graphene
naturally gives rise to unusual optoelectronic properties,1
potentially useful for high-speed modulators and the
other active components. While it has been touted as
an important material for terahertz (THz) frequency
devices,2 charge transport properties at THz frequencies
under field conditions commonly found in devices, on the
order 10's kV/cm, are poorly understood. This is in part
due to a lack of control over the extrinsic properties of the
devices and graphene's sensitivity to its environment.3
The electrodynamic response of doped graphene has pre-
viously been studied in the low field, linear regime under
gated conditions4 for frequencies ranging from near dc5
to THz,6–10 mid IR11 and optical regimes.12 Under in-
tense fields, however, charge carriers can acquire signifi-
cant momentum and for Fermi energies (Ef ) close to the
charge neutrality point (CNP), a complicated interplay
between intra- and inter-band transitions can occur.13 A
better understanding of these nonlinear interactions and
their density dependence is needed for the future device
design, which is the aim of this study. For this purpose,
we study the THz electrodynamic response of graphene
under high field conditions and controlled Fermi level
through a gate voltage VG applied to an ionic gel top

The development of efficient nonlinear optical methods
for the generation of intense THz pulses14 has made it
possible to time resolve the high field response of charge
and spin excitations in materials.15 In graphene, due to a
strong interband dipole matrix element that diverges at
the charge neutrality (Dirac) point, the THz light-matter
interaction can be easily pushed into the nonperturba-
tive regime even by modest electric fields on the order
of several 10's kV/cm.16,17 As the thermalization time of
accelerated hot carriers is noted to be exceedingly short
in graphene,18 these nonlinearities can be quantified as
an elevated temperature of the electronic subsystem.23
Recent works have demonstrated a strong THz field-
induced transparency in room-temperature graphene19 in
both doped19–22 and optically excited graphene.24 This
phenomenon has been described by ultrafast intra-band
carrier thermalization on the order of 30 fs,18 leading
to a transient elevated carrier temperature on the order
of 2000 K and subsequent optical phonon emission dur-
ing cooling. In this model, the non-equilibrium heating
and generation of optical phonons subsequently enhances
the carrier scattering, suppressing the field-driven current
and thus THz absorption in graphene. Other sources of
carrier scattering that can potentially play an important
role in the THz response of graphene include long-range

2

II. THEORETICAL MODEL

In this section, we discuss the model that we use to
account for the effects of tuning the Fermi energy on
the transmission of THz light. Using this model, we
extract the dependence of the scattering time on the
Fermi energy and the lattice and electron temperature.
There are four potentially important sources of carrier
scattering in graphene: short-range impurity scattering,
long-range impurity scattering, phonon scattering, and
carrier-carrier scattering.

Strictly speaking the carrier dynamics should be mod-
eled using a full dynamic model that includes the nonlin-
ear response arising from the linear band dispersion and
interband transitions.13 We find however, in agreement
with our previous work,24 that for the samples and field
strengths considered here, there is essentially no intrin-
sically nonlinear response and a linear Drude model is
sufficient. The nonlinear response of the graphene is in-
corporated in the model by employing a scattering time
that depends on the THz field amplitude. Thus, in what
follows, we employ the Drude model.

First, we need to relate the transmission level to the
conductivity of graphene. It can be easily shown that the
transmission through the graphene sample normalized to
the transmitted field through the substrate is given by6

T (ω) =

TG+S

TS

=

1 + n

1 + n + Zoσ(ω)N

,

(1)

where TG+S and TS are the transmission through the
sample and the substrate only, respectively, n is the re-
fractive index of the substrate, σ(ω) is the complex ac
sheet conductivity of a single layer of graphene and N is
the number of graphene layers in the sample. The con-
ductivity, dominated by the intra-band response at THz
frequencies is given by a simple Drude model 11

σ(ω) =

D

(1/τ − iω)

,

(2)

where ω is the angular frequency, τ is the total carrier
momentum scattering time, and D is the Drude weight
given by9,10

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

µf

2kBTe

D =

2e2kBTe
(π2)

ln

2cosh

,

(3)

where e is the electron charge, kB is the Boltzmann
constant, Te is the electron temperature,  is the re-
duced Planck's constant, and µf is the chemical poten-
tial. For simplicity, the chemical potential is considered
to be equal to the Fermi energy at room temperature.
However, as the electron temperature rises, we adjust
the chemical potential so that the net charge on the
graphene is unchanged as the temperature rises. The
adjusted chemical potential along with the correspond-
ing temperature are used then to calculate the Drude

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic of the graphene sample on a substrate
with gold four-point-probe contacts and a side gate contact.
The broadband THz pulses traverse the sample at normal
incidence. (b) The mechanism for ionic gating of graphene is
shown in the inset, illustrating the accumulated Debye layer
under a gate voltage VG.

impurity scattering, due to the presence of the charged
impurities in the substrate, short-range scattering, due
to neutral impurities or disorder in the graphene itself,
and carrier-carrier scattering. While impurity scattering
dominates at low lattice temperatures, optical phonon
scattering becomes more dominant at higher tempera-
tures (T > 700 K).25

Saturable absorption due to interband contributions
has also been observed in the visible regime due to the
phase-space filling effects as well as carrier heating. At
THz frequencies, the threshold for an interband response
is determined by the carrier density, as the carriers must
be excited at twice the quasi-Fermi energy to undergo
a transition.
In this work, we study the Fermi energy
dependence of the nonlinear THz transmission of gated
graphene and show that although the nonlinear response
is similar in different samples with different doping lev-
els, it does not appear that this effect can be described
by heating of the lattice alone. The paper is organized
as follows. In Sec. II, we discuss the possible scattering
mechanisms and their effects on THz transmission as a
basis for the model used to describe the data. The results
for both five-layer and single-layer graphene samples are
presented in Sec. III. Finally, the conclusions are sum-
marized in Sec. IV.

weight. Using Eqs. (1-3), we can extract the total ef-
fective scattering time τ for any measured transmission
level for each gate voltage and THz field amplitude. The
gate voltage and field amplitude dependence of the scat-
tering time can therefore be directly obtained from the
THz transmission data once the electron temperature is
determined.

We now turn to the model that we employ for the
scattering time used in the Drude model. We present
a simple model of the effects of the lattice temperature
and the carrier density on the scattering times based on
three scattering mechanisms: short-range neutral impu-
rity scattering, charged long-range impurity scattering
and scattering due to absorption of optical phonons. Al-
though there can be contributions to the scattering rate
due to interactions with acoustic phonons, these are usu-
ally considered to be relatively small at the temperatures
considered here.29 We do not include carrier-carrier scat-
tering due to the difficulties in accurately modelling its
effects and because, for similar Fermi energies and THz
field amplitudes, it has been shown that carrier-carrier
scattering can be neglected without qualitatively chang-
ing the results.26 We will return to this issue when dis-
cussing our field-dependent results.

The expression for the total scattering rate is thus

given by

1
τ

=

1

τimp

+

1
τop

,

(4)

where τimp is the impurity scattering time τop is the opti-
cal phonon scattering time. The impurity scattering rate
is given by

1

τimp

=

1
τsr

+

1

τCoul

+

1
τml

.

(5)

In this expression, 1/τsr is the short-range neutral impu-
rity scattering rate, which has been shown theoretically
to be linearly dependent on the energy of the carriers,27;
in our model, we take this rate to be proportional to the
average energy per carrier with respect to the Dirac point
K, which is given by

{ρee(K + k) + ρhh(K + k)} vF k

(cid:80)

(cid:80)

Eav =

k

{ρee(K + k) + ρhh(K + k)}

,

(6)

k

where ρee(ρhh) is the free electron (hole) population den-
sity, and vF is the Fermi velocity. The second term in the
impurity scattering rate is, τCoul, which is due to charged
long-range impurities. This rate has been shown to be
inversely proportional to the square root of the carrier
density (due to carrier screening)28. Finally, τml is an
additional gate-voltage-independent scattering time that
we find is necessary in order to model the bias depen-
dence of the scattering time in our multi-layer sample.
The physical origin of this term is not clear, but it may
be due to scattering from the ionic gel or is perhaps arises

3

due to a correction term in the relationship between the
gate voltage and the Fermi energy. Thus, the final ex-
pression for the impurity scattering rate is

1

τimp

= csrEav +

cCoul
Eef f

+

1
τml

,

(7)

where csr and cCoul are constants that are experimentally
determined and are dependent on the impurity densities,
and Eef f is the effective Fermi energy that corresponds
to the square root of the carrier density and is given by
Dπ2/e2.

We now turn to the scattering due to optical phonons.
There are two potential types of optical phonons that can
contribute to scattering: optical phonons in the graphene
itself and polar surface phonons in the substrate.41,42
We find, using the parameters in Ref. 41 that, due to
the weak coupling strength, the scattering rate contribu-
tion from the surface phonons in both substrate materials
is much smaller than those due to the graphene optical
phonons. Thus, in what follows, we neglect the phonons
in the substrate and include only the contribution from
the phonons in the graphene itself.29

in principle,

Previous studies have shown that energy transfer from
electrons to phonons takes place on a timescale of about
100 fs.30,31 Thus,
if there are electrons
that have been driven by the field more than an optical
phonon energy above any vacant states, one would ex-
pect emission of optical phonons over the pulse duration,
which would increase the lattice temperature. However,
without performing a detailed simulation that tracks the
energies of individual electrons, it is very difficult to accu-
rately include this contribution to the scattering. Thus,
for simplicity, we only include the process of phonon ab-
sorption, but not phonon emission.

The optical phonon scattering rate due to optical

phonon emission in the graphene is given by

1
τop

=

D2
o
(22v2
F σmωo)

(Eav + ωo)
(eωo/kB Tl − 1)

,

(8)

where ωo = 147 meV is the graphene optical phonon
energy, σm = 7.6 × 10−8 g/cm2 is the 2D mass density
of graphene29, Do = 5 × 109 eV/cm is the deformation
potential for the optical phonons32 and Tl is the lattice
temperature. Various values for the optical phonon en-
ergy and deformation potential have been reported in the
literature29,32–34. We employ those found in Ref. 24, al-
though, as we discuss in the following sections, we have
considered the effect of modifying the deformation po-
tential on the results. We finally note that in all cases we
assume equality of the carrier and lattice temperatures
that appear respectively in the Drude weight (Eq. (3))
and the optical phonon scattering rate (Eq. (8)).

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND

DISCUSSION

4

In order to investigate the effect of the substrates and
number of graphene layers on the transport properties
of graphene to the intense THz field, we fabricated two
different samples treated in the next two sections. The
first is a five layer graphene sample, fabricated by trans-
ferring sequentially monolayer graphene onto a sapphire
substrate, and the second a monolayer sample on a quartz
substrate. The substrates were patterned with 5/100 nm
thickness of Cr/Au (prior to transfer) for the electrical
four-point-probe measurements as shown in Fig. 1. The
gate was created by placing the fifth contact at the edge
of the substrate so that it is in contact with the ionic gel
for electrochemical doping. The ionic gel was fabricated
using the method proposed by Ref. 35 and transferred to
the sample under an inert glovebox environment. A uni-
form layer of ionic gel with a thickness of less than 50 µm
was spin coated on the graphene sample as well as the
bare substrate to serve as a reference. Upon applying the
gate voltage, mobile ions are transferred to the surface of
the graphene to form a Debye layer with a thickness on
the order of 1 nm.36 This type of solid polymer electrolyte
gate is much thinner than the conventional 300 nm SiO2
back gate, thus a much higher gate capacitance can be
achieved. With the electrolyte ionic gating, high doping
levels on the order of 5 × 1013 cm−2 are possible.36 The
gating response of the graphene is measured in terms of
the electrical current driven from the source to the drain
electrode through the graphene channel as a function of
VG. In order to estimate the Fermi energy as a function of
gate voltage relative to the charge neutrality point volt-
age (VCN P ), we use the following equation from Ref. 10
for a similar geometry and ionic gel, where

Ef = 0.346(cid:112)(VG − VCN P )

[eV ].

(9)

The case of VG = VCN P needs to be treated separately
because, in agreement with other researchers,37 we find
that due to spatial inhomogeneity of the charge density
across the graphene sample an effective Ef must be de-
termined at the nominal CNP gate voltage, in a range of
±100 meV.10

The high-field time-domain THz spectrometer was de-
veloped based on tilted-pulse front optical rectification in
lithium niobate,14 with peak THz field amplitudes lim-
ited to 70 kV/cm in this work. The bandwidth of the
THz pulses was ∼ 3 THz and was detected using electro-
optic sampling in a 300 µm thick (110)-cut GaP crystal.
The emitted THz pulses were collected and focused by a
set of off-axis parabolic mirrors to a 450 µm spot size as
determined by an uncooled microbolometer camera. The
graphene sample was positioned carefully at the THz fo-
cus for high-field transmission measurements at normal
incidence. The amplitude of the THz pulses was varied
using a pair of wire-grid polarizers prior to the sample in
the collimated section of the beam. The measurements
were performed by sweeping the graphene gate voltage

FIG. 2.
(a) Four-point-probe measurements of the 5-layer
sample dc resistance with the charge neutrality point indi-
cated by the resistance peak.
(b) The Raman data (with
the G and 2D peaks) of single layer of CVD grown graphene
before stacking to form the 5 layers.

and registering the value of the transmitted peak THz
electric field. No THz pulse reshaping was observed as
the gate voltage varies from −2.5 V (below the Dirac
point) to 2.5 V , thus all information on the nonlinear
transmission can be quantified by monitoring the THz
pulse peak field transmission.

A. Five-layer sample

Large-area, single-layer graphene was fabricated by
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on Cu-foil using stan-
dard techniques. Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) is
used to transfer the graphene to a c-cut sapphire sub-
strate with refractive index of 3.31 and the PMMA layer
was removed. The process was repeated five times so that
the five-layer graphene sample was obtained, with the
layers electrically decoupled from one another. Fig. 2(a)
shows the sheet resistance of graphene as a function of
gate voltage. The CNP is specified as the resistance
maximum which occurs in this case at VG = −0.8 V .
We note that hysteresis was observed in these resistance
measurements when sweeping the gate voltage, which is
commonly observed in ionic gel gates.38,39 We therefore
only perform measurements on the positive sweep of the
gate voltage for repeatability. The Debye absorption of

5

E2
samp
E2

FIG. 4. For the five layer sample: (a) THz power transmission
defined as  T =
, curve fitted by Eq. 10 for two
different gate voltages, one at the Dirac point (VG − VCN P =
0 V , red line) and the other one at a n-doped Fermi level
corresponding to (VG − VCN P = −2.4 V , blue line). (b-d) Fit
parameters Esat, Tlin, and Tns extracted from Eq. (10) for
power transmission curves as a function of gate voltage.

ref

of graphene and the substrate, and Eref is the peak field
transmitted through the ionic gel and the substrate only.
The model is given by:19

T (Einc) = Tns

(eEinc

2/Esat

2 − 1)]

ln[1 + Tlin
Tns
Einc

2/Esat

2

(10)

where Einc, Esat, Tlin and Tns are the incident peak elec-
tric field, the saturation electric field, the linear power
transmission coefficient and the nonsaturable power
transmission coefficient, respectively.

In Fig. 4(a) we present the measured transmitted
power as a function of the incident field along with the
fit using Eq. (10) for VG = VCN P (corresponding to
the CNP, red line) and VG − VCN P = −2.4 V (i.e.
highly the n-doped case, blue line). The saturation on-
T, occurs at a lower
set of the power transmission,
Einc = 9.7 kV/cm at the CNP relative to what occurs
for higher doping, as demonstrated by Fig. 4(b). Tlin
[Fig. 4(c)] and Tns [Fig. 4(d)] are higher at the CNP
than at other Fermi levels, overall expected due to the
larger conductivity of the doped graphene. The satura-
tion behavior for the curves in Fig. 4(a) is explained by a
decrease in carrier mobility as the THz excitation redis-
tributes carriers within the conduction band.19 There-
fore, the decrease in Esat when the gate voltage ap-
proaches the Dirac point can be attributed to an increase
in the scattering rate when the Fermi level is tuned to the
CNP, as we shall discuss shortly.

We now use the model presented in Section II to ex-
tract the scattering time as a function of the Fermi energy
and the incident THz field. While the Fermi energy may

FIG. 3. For the five-layer sample: (a) The THz pulse peak
field transmission through the gated graphene sample for the
field strengths indicated, normalized to the transmission at
the Dirac point at VG − VCN P = 0. (b) The field dependence
of the THz peak field transmission  t = EG+S
at various
gate voltages. Einc is the incident THz electric field at the
graphene sample position.

ES

the ionic gel is located at lower frequencies than THz,
producing a transparent top gated graphene sample. All
measurements in this work are performed at room tem-
perature. Fig. 2(b) shows the Raman spectroscopy of one
of the five layers of graphene before stacking. The ratio
between the 2D and G peak values is 2.8 which indicates
high quality single layer graphene.40

Fig. 3(a) shows the variation of the transmitted peak
THz electric field (normalized to its maximum value at
the Dirac point) as a function of gate voltage sweep
for different incident peak electric fields in the range
of 2 kV/cm to 70 kV/cm. The THz modulation in-
duced by the gate voltage sweep (Fermi level change in
graphene) is a strongly nonlinear function of the peak
electric field value. At low fields, gate-induced THz mod-
ulation is more than 31% whereas for higher field ampli-
tudes the modulation decreases and saturates at a value
of 7.4% above 60 kV/cm. As in previous work on un-
gated graphene, a saturable power transmission function
can be used to phenomenologically describe the behavior
observed in Fig. 3(b).19 The power transmission is de-
fined as  T =
, where Esamp is the peak THz
electric field transmitted through the ionic gel, 5 layers

(cid:16) Esamp

(cid:17)2

Eref

not be precisely the same in all 5 layers of the graphene
sample, for simplicity we use the same value for the five
layers. Similarly, we assume that the scattering time is
the same in all layers. We estimate Ef from gate voltages
other than the CNP voltage using Eq. 9. To determine
the Fermi energy for VG = VCN P , we first use the model
of Section II to extract the fitting parameters, csr, cCoul
and τml in Eq. 7 for the transmission data for the lowest
THz field amplitude of 2 kV/cm. Taking the lattice and
electron temperatures at this lowest field to be 300 K, we
obtain csr=49 ps−1eV −1, cCoul = 0 and 1
=7.3 ps−1.
The data as well as the fit are shown in Fig. 5(a). We now
extract an effective Fermi energy at the VG = VCN P of
approximately 90 meV by extrapolating the fitting curve.
This value is in good agreement with other studies that
used the same mechanism to tune the Fermi energy.10 We
find from our fit that the contribution of charged impu-
rities is negligible and that at this temperature and field
strength, the contribution of the optical phonons is also
very small. Thus, the dominant contribution to scatter-
ing at this lowest field appears to arise from short-range
impurities, which results in the approximately hyperbolic
relationship between τ and Ef seen in the figure.27

τml

We now turn to the dependence of the scattering time
on the incident field for different Fermi energies. Rather
than using our temperature-dependent model of scatter-
ing, we first assume that the electron and phonon tem-
peratures do not change with the incident THz field am-
plitude and simply extract the net scattering time as a
function of the incident field strength to two different
Fermi levels. This is plotted in Fig. 5(b). As can be
seen, for both Fermi energies, the scattering time de-
creases dramatically with increasing field amplitude. We
see that the decrease in the scattering time with field is
much larger for the low Fermi energy case. This would
be expected if the increased scattering is due to a mech-
anism that has a rate that is roughly proportional to
the Fermi energy and that would increase at high fields.
There are two likely candidates: optical phonon scatter-
ing and carrier-carrier scattering.

We first consider optical phonon scattering. When the
field is higher, it heats the graphene up considerably; this,
in turn results in a larger optical phonon population and
a shorter scattering time. To test the viability of the
optical phonon mechanism, we employed our model that
includes the effects of electron and lattice temperature.
Using the impurity scattering rates found at the lowest
field and requiring that the electron and phonon temper-
atures are equal, we were able to obtain good agreement
with the experimental data for the transmission by using
the temperature as a fitting parameter. We found that at
the highest fields, the temperature required was approx-
imately 1550 K. To determine if such temperatures are
physically sensible, we compared the experimental result
for the energy absorbed per unit area to the increase in
the electron and phonon populations per unit area. We
found that the required increase in the system energy
was more than an order of magnitude greater than the

6

absorbed THz energy for the 70 kV/cm field. Most of
the increase in the energy of the system when the tem-
perature increases to such levels resides in the optical
phonons, not the electrons. Because there is not uni-
versal agreement as the values of the optical phonon en-
ergy and deformation potential, we tried adjusting these
parameters. However, we could not find any values of
these parameters that yielded anything approaching en-
ergy balance at all fields and Fermi energies for one set of
parameters. We conclude from this, that for this sample
at least, the decrease in the scattering time with increas-
ing field does not arise entirely from an increase in the
optical phonon population due to an increase in the lat-
tice temperature.

Another possible mechanism for the field dependent
scattering is carrier-carrier scattering. This scattering
rate increase rapidly as the carrier density increases (as
observed). Moreover, it also increases with the energy of
the carriers, which will occur when the field amplitude
is high. Modeling carrier-carrier scattering with energy
dependence would require a sophisticated Monte-Carlo
or density matrix simulation. Thus, although we cannot
rule out this mechanism, it is beyond the scope of the
current work.

We now examine the results for our monolayer
graphene sample to see how its transmission depends on
the Fermi energy and the THz field amplitude.

B. Single-layer sample

A single-layer graphene sample was prepared by chem-
ical vapor deposition on Cu-foil and transferred onto a
z-cut quartz substrate with a refractive index n = 1.96.
The sheet resistance of this sample as a function of VG
was determined by a two terminal measurement shown in
Fig. 6(a) with the CNP indicated again by the resistance
peak. Electron (hole) doping is induced by changing VG
above (below) the CNP voltage VCN P and Eq. 9 is used
to calculate the Fermi level energy. Fig. 6(b) shows the
Raman spectra for the single layer graphene sample, with
a 2D/G peak ratio of 1.78 confirming high quality mono-
layer graphene.

Fig. 7(a) shows the normalized THz peak electric field
amplitude transmitted through the graphene when the
Fermi-level is swept from -1 to 0.5 V. Again, our data
does not show any phase change in the THz waveform
transmitted through the graphene by increasing the in-
cident THz field and so the conductivity change can be
completely quantified by monitoring the peak transmis-
sion. For the lowest THz peak electric field strength of 1.5
kV/cm, a significant 20% reduction in the peak transmis-
sion was observed at VG - VCN P = −1 V or Ef = −340
meV. As expected, the increased doping leads to higher
conductivity and therefore absorption of the THz pulse,
however, increasing the incident THz field leads to a re-
duction in the doping-induced absorption as in the 5-
layer sample.21,24 As in the 5-layer case, a continuous

7

FIG. 5. (a) The impurity scattering time (τimp) versus Fermi
energy, and (b) total scattering time versus incident field am-
plitude at the CNP and at the highest Fermi level of 442 meV
for the five-layer sample. Note that in (a), the value for Ef
the first point is determined via a fit to the curve.

reduction in field-induced transmission modulation oc-
curs as the gate voltage approaches the charge neutrality
point. This behavior is best seen in Fig. 7(b), showing
the peak transmission as a function of the THz peak field
strength for various applied VG. The THz field-induced
transparency (the percentage increase in transmission)
is more pronounced for high doping levels. As with the
five-layer sample, we find that the induced nonlinearity is
mainly due to an increase in the carrier scattering when
the THz field is increased.21,24

We extract the scattering behavior by using the model
of Section II. We extract the low-field scattering parame-
ters in the same way as was done in the last section taking
the temperature to be room temperature. The transmis-
sion data at the lowest field amplitude can be well repro-
duced by the theory only if we consider both short-range
neutral and long-range charged impurity scattering in ad-
dition to optical phonon scattering. We find that the best
fit is obtained for csr =30 ps−1eV −1, cCoul =3.63 ps−1eV
and and τml =0. The data as well as the fit are shown in
Fig. 8(a). Note that the increase in the scattering time
with Fermi energy indicates that long range charged im-

(a) Two terminal measurements of the resistance
FIG. 6.
and (b) the Raman data (with the G and 2D peaks) of the
monolayer sample.

purity scattering is dominant at this field. The presence
of long range scattering in this sample may be linked
with the direct contact of the graphene with the SiO2
substrate as opposed to the 5 layer sample, where 4 of
the layers are physically removed from the substrate and
the effects of charged impurities on carriers in the up-
per layers are partially screened by carriers in the lower
ones. Finally, using the extrapolation of the fit to low
Fermi energy, we extract and Fermi energy of 88 meV
for the bias VG = VCN P .

We now use the same constant-temperature model of
the previous section to determine the net scattering time
as a function of the incident field strength for the five dif-
ferent Fermi levels and plot these times in Fig. 8(b). As
in the five-layer case, the scattering time decreases dra-
matically with increasing field amplitude for all Fermi en-
ergies. However, in contrast to the results of the previous
section, we find that the decrease in the scattering time
with the field is much smaller when VG = VCN P . One
reason for this difference is that in the monolayer, the
low-field scattering time is the shortest when the Fermi
energy is the lowest, thus the effect of any additional scat-
tering channels is smaller. At the highest fields, just as
in the five-layer sample, the scattering time is the largest
when VG = VCN P . This seems to indicate again that

8

FIG. 7. (a) The normalized peak transmission as a function of
the gate voltage for various THz peak electric field strengths
and (b) the dependence of the peak transmission on the THz
peak electric field for various doping levels for the monolayer
sample.

FIG. 8. (a) The impurity scattering time (τimp) versus Fermi
energy at the lowest incident THz field of 1.5 kV/cm, and (b)
the THz field dependence of (a) the carrier scattering rate.
Note that in (a), the value for Ef the first point is determined
via a fit to the curve.

the field-dependent scattering rate is larger when the car-
rier density (or perhaps average carrier energy) is larger.
However, the trend is not the same for the intermediate
Fermi energies, where at the highest field, the scattering
rate is larger when the Fermi energy is smaller (with the
exception of the CNP result). It appears that the result
at the CNP is somewhat of an anomaly in this sample.

Although, the Fermi energy dependence of the field-
dependent scattering component is not as clear as in
the five-layer sample, we again examined where optical-
phonon scattering is a possible mechanism. We modeled
the optical phonon scattering by taking the temperature
to be a fitting parameter. Again, although we could re-
produce the observed transmission curves, the tempera-
tures required were very large. The temperatures at the
highest field ranged from 1300 K for the highest Fermi en-
ergy to almost 3000 K at the CNP. Again, such huge tem-
peratures require that the energy deposited in the system
is a factor of 3 to 10 larger than the energy that is experi-
mentally found to be absorbed by the graphene. As in the
five-layer case, we tried adjusting the phonon energy and
deformation potential, but for all combinations that we

tried we could not achieve anything approaching energy
balance at all fields and Fermi energies. We thus conclude
that for this sample as well, optical phonons cannot be
the major contributor to the increase in the scattering
rate with increasing field. In this sample, however, due
to the more complex dependence of the field-dependent
scattering contribution on the Fermi energy, it is not as
clear that carrier-carrier scattering is a likely candidate.

IV. CONCLUSION

We have studied nonlinear THz light-matter interac-
tion for both monolayer graphene on quartz and a stack
of 5 monolayers of graphene on sapphire under the con-
trolled Fermi level conditions. The two samples exhibited
opposite dependencies on the Fermi energy for low THz
fields. The monolayer sample scattering rate was domi-
nated by charged impurities, while the five layer sample
scattering was neutral impurity dominated. This differ-
ence is likely explained as arising from different prepara-
tion recipes as well as differences in the substrates.

We also observed a strong increase in the THz trans-

9

mission with increasing field that occurs for THz peak
electric fields as low as 8 kV/cm. This increase appears
to result from a decrease in the carrier scattering times
with increasing field. Our analyses indicate that opti-
cal phonon absorption is not likely the main source of
this field-induced increase in the scattering rate. The
source of this increase remains uncertain. For the five
layer sample, the most promising mechanism is perhaps
carrier-carrier scattering, but for the monolayer sample
the mechanism is even more unclear.

This work points to the importance of future modelling
of full carrier and lattice dynamics in graphene excited by
intense THz pulses to determine the main source of the
strongly nonlinear response. The interaction of high field

THz pulses with graphene is significantly dependent on
Fermi energy. Moreover, given the variability in process-
ing of graphene films, we show that it is entirely possible
that different impurity scattering mechanisms dominate
in different samples, even though the field dependence is
similar for a fixed Fermi energy. Thus any comprehen-
sive study must be under controlled gated conditions. We
anticipate that our findings will be important for future
designs of graphene devices operating at THz frequencies,
influencing performance due to nonlinearities arising at
the kV/cm operating fields.

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support

from NSERC, FRQNT and CFI.

1 K. S. A. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. B. Morozov,
D. Jiang, M. I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos, A. A. Firsov,
Nature 438, 197-200 (2006).

2 T. Otsuji, S. A. B. Tombet, A. Satou, H. Fukidome,
M. Suemitsu, E. Sano, V. Popov, M. Ryzhii, V. Ryzhii,
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 45, 303001 (2012).

3 C. J. Docherty, C. T. Lin, H. J. Joyce, R. J. Nicholas,
L. M. Herz, L. J. Li, M. B. Johnston, Nat. Commun. 3,
1228 (2012).

4 F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crom-

mie, Y. R. Shen, Sience 320, 206-209 (2008).

5 Y. M. Lin, K. A. Jenkins, A. Valdes-Garcia, J. P. Small,

D. B. Farmer, P. Avouris, Nano Lett. 9, 422-426 (2009).

6 J. M. Dawlaty, S. Shivaraman, J. Strait, P. George,
M. V. S. Chandrashekhar, F. Rana, M. G. Spencer, D. Vek-
sler, Y. Chen, App. Phys. Lett. 93, 131905 (2008).

7 J. D. Buron, D. H. Petersen, P. Bøggild, D. G. Cooke,
M. Hilke, J. Sun, E. Whiteway, P. F. Nielsen, O. Hansen,
A. Yurgens, Nano Lett. 12, 5074-5081 (2012).

8 J. L. Tomaino, A. D. Jameson, J. W. Kevek, M. J. Paul,
A. M. van der Zande, R. A. Barton, P. L. McEuen,
E. D. Minot, Y. S. Lee, Opt. Expr. 19, 141-146 (2011).

9 A. J. Frenzel, C. H. Lui, Y. C. Shin, J. Kong, N. Gedik,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 056602 (2014).

oni, P. Hoffmann , Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 027403 (2013).

19 H. Y. Hwang, N. C. Brandt, H. Farhat, A. L. Hsu, J. Kong,
K. A. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B 117, 15819-15824 (2013).
20 H. A. Hafez, I. Al-Naib, K. Oguri, Y. Sekine, M. M. Dig-
nam, A. Ibrahim, D. G. Cooke, S. Tanaka, F. Komori,
H. Hibino, T. Ozaki, AIP Advances 4, 117118 (2014).

21 M. J. Paul, Y. C. Chang, Z. J. Thompson, A. Stickel,
J. Wardini, H. Choi, E. D. Minot, B. Hou, J. A. Nees,
T. B. Norris, Y. S. Lee, New J. Phys. 15, 085019 (2013).
22 M. J. Paul, B. Lee, J. L. Wardini, Z. J. Thompson,
A. D. Stickel, A. Mousavian, H. Choi, E. D. Minot,
Y. S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 221107 (2014).

23 Z. Mics, K. J. Tielrooij, K. Parvez, S. A. Jensen, I. Ivanov,
X. Feng, K. Mullen, M. Bonn, D. Turchinovich, Nat. Com-
mun. 6:7655 doi: 10.1038/ncomms8655 (2015).

24 H. A. Hafez, I. Al-Naib, M. M. Dignam, Y. Sekine,
K. Oguri, F. Blanchard, D. G. Cooke, S. Tanaka, F. Ko-
mori, H. Hibino, T. Ozaki, Phys. Rev. B 91, 035422 (2015).
25 W. S. Bao, S. Y. Liu, X. L. Lei, C. Wang, J. Phys. Condens.

Matter. 21, 305302 (2009).

26 I. Al-Naib, M. Poschmann, M. M. Dignam, Phys. Rev. B

91, 205407 (2015).

27 E. H. Hwang, S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 77, 195412 (2008).
28 S. Das Sarma, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, E. Rossi, Rev. Mod.

10 S. F. Shi, T. T. Tang, B. Zeng, L. Ju, Q. Zhou, A. Zettl,

Phys. 83, 407 (2011).

F. Wang, Nano Lett. 14, 1578-1582 (2014).

11 J. Horng, C. F. Chen, B. Geng, C. Girit, Y. Zhang, Z. Hao,
H. A. Bechtel, M. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. Ron
Shen, F. Wang, Phys. Rev.B 83, 165113 (2011).

12 K. F. Mak, M. Y. Sfeir, Y. Wu, C. H. Lui, J. A. Misewich,

T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 196405 (2008).

13 I. Al-Naib, J. E. Sipe, M. M. Dignam, Phys. Rev. B 90,

245423 (2014).

14 H. Hirori, A. Doi, F. Blanchard, K. Tanaka, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 98, 091106 (2011).

15 A. Pashkin, A. Sell, T. Kampfrath, R. Huber, New J. Phys.

15, 065003 (2013).

16 P. Bowlan, E. Martinez-Moreno, K. Reimann, T. Elsaesser,

M. Woerner, Phys. Rev. B. 89, 041408 (2014).

17 J. A. Crosse, X. Xu, M. S. Sherwin, R. B. Liu, Nat. Com-

mun. 5, 4854 (2014).

18 J. C. Johannsen, S. Ulstrup, F. Cilento, A. Crepaldi,
M. Zacchigna, C. Cacho, I. .C. E. Turcu, E. Springate,
F. Fromm, C. Raidel, T. Seyller, F. Parmigiani, M. Gri-

29 T. Fang, A. Konar, H. Xing, D. Jena, Phys. Rev. B 84,

125450 (2011).

30 M. Breusing, C. Ropers, T. Elsaesser, Phys. Rev. Lett.

102, 086809 (2009).

31 C. H. Lui, K. F. Mak, J. Shan, T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 105, 127404 (2010).

32 N. Sule, I. Knezevic, J. Appl. Phys. 112, 053702 (2012).
33 J. H. Strait, H. Wang, S. Shivaraman, V. Shields,

M. Spencer, F. Rana, Nano Lett. 11, 4902-4906, (2011).

34 E. H. Hwang, S. D. Sarma, Phys. Rev. B 79, 165404 (2009).
35 C. F. Chen, C. H. Park, B. W. Boudouris, J. Horng,
B. Geng, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, R. A. Segal-
man, S. G. Louie, F. Wang, Nature 471, 617-620 (2011).
36 A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha,
U. V. Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy,
A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari, A. K. Sood, Nature Nanotech.
3, 210-215 (2008).

37 J. Martin, N. Akerman, G. Ulbricht, T. Lohmann,
J. H. Smet, K. Von Klitzing, A. Yacoby, Nat. Phys. 4,

144-148, (2008).

38 S. K. Lee, H. Y. Jang, S. Jang, E. Choi, B. H. Hong, J. Lee,

S. Park, J. H. Ahn, Nano Lett. 12, 3472-3476 (2012).

39 J. Ye, M. F. Craciun, M. Koshino, S. Russo, S. Inoue,
H. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. F. Morpurgo, Y. Iwasa, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 13002-13006 (2011).

40 D. Graf, F. Molitor, K. Ensslin, C. Stampfer, A. Jungen,

C. Hierold, L. Wirtz, Nano Lett. 7, 238-242 (2007).

41 K. Aniruddha, F. Tian, J. Debdeep, Phys. Rev. B 82,

115452 (2010).

42 S. Berciaud, M. Y. Han, K. F. Mak, L. E. Brus, P. Kim,

T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 227401 (2010).

10

