Direct comparison of domain wall behavior in Permalloy nanowires patterned by

electron beam lithography and focused ion beam milling

APS/123-QED

M.A. Basith*, S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, and J. N. Chapman

School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Glasgow, G12 8QQ, United Kingdom.

School of Electronics and Electrical Engineering,

University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United Kingdom.

J.M.R. Weaver

Nominally identical permalloy nanowires, with widths down to 150 nm, were fabricated onto a
single electron transparent Si3N4 membrane using electron beam lithography (EBL) and focused
ion beam (FIB) milling. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) experiments were performed
to compare the nanostructures produced by these two techniques in what we believe is the first
direct comparison of fabrication techniques for nominally identical nanowires. Both EBL and FIB
methods produced high quality structures with edge roughness being of the order of the mean grain
size 5 -10 nm observed in the continuous films. However, significant grain growth was observed
along the edges of the FIB patterned nanowires. Lorentz TEM in situ imaging was carried out to
compare the magnetic behavior of the domain walls in the patterned nanowires with anti-notches
present to pin domain walls. The overall process of domain wall pinning and depinning at the
anti-notches showed consistent behaviour between nanowires fabricated by the two methods with
the FIB structures having slightly lower characteristic fields compared to the EBL wires. However,
a significant difference was observed in the formation of a vortex structure inside the anti-notches
of the EBL nanowires after depinning of the domain walls. No vortex structure was seen inside the
anti-notches of the FIB patterned nanowires. Results from micromagnetic simulations suggest that
the vortex structure inside the anti-notch can be suppressed if the saturation magnetization (Ms) is
reduced along the nanowires edges. A reduction of Ms along the wire edges may also be responsible
for a decrease in the domain wall depinning fields. Whilst the two fabrication methods show that
well defined structures can be produced for the dimensions considered here, the differences in the
magnetic behavior for nominally identical structures may be an issue if such structures are to be
used as conduits for domain walls in potential memory and logic applications.

PACS numbers: 81.07.Gf, 62.23.Hj, 68.37.Lp, 75.60.Ch

I.

INTRODUCTION

(DW) behavior

in ferromagnetic nanowires

Understanding and controlling magnetic domain
is
wall
of
fundamental scientific interest and important for
their potential applicability in future spintronic devices
such as magnetic logic [1] and race-track memory [2].
Micromagnetic simulations [3 -- 5], magneto-optic Kerr
effect magnetometry [6, 7], off-axis electron holography
[8] and magnetic imaging techniques [9, 10] have con-
tributed useful information for a greater understanding
of it properties. To ensure the reliable operation of
devices, performance variability must be reduced and
high quality nanofabrication is extremely important.
Previous reports [11, 12]
indicate that the structural
roughness at the edges of the nanostructures produced
by fabrication processes affect
the magnetic prop-
erties of the nanostructures. Amongst a variety of
nanofabrication techniques, electron beam lithography
(EBL) is widely used for high resolution submicron
scale patterning of magnetic materials. This technique
requires a number of steps including resist spinning,
pattern exposure, metallization, removal of resist from
the sample surface and lift off of the residual materials.
In contrast, focused ion beam (FIB) based fabrication

by milling is essentially a one step patterning process of
a continuous film and an excellent tool for rapid device
proto-typing [9]. Nevertheless, FIB has some disadvan-
tages [13] especially due to the heavy Ga+ ions used
for the milling process. These include radiation induced
damage and ion implantation. The extent to which
the magnetic properties of nanostructures are affected
by the differences in physical properties produced by
patterning structures using EBL and FIB techniques has
not been studied extensively. Therefore, in the present
investigation, nominally identical permalloy nanowires
fabricated by these two nanofabrication techniques are
compared through characterization of their physical
nanostructure and magnetic behavior.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

The permalloy (Ni80Fe20) film of 20 nm thickness was
deposited by thermal evaporation onto a single electron
transparent Si3N4 membrane for the fabrication of the
nanowires. The structure of the fabricated nanowires is
shown in Fig. 1(a) which contains three 320 nm wide
and 140 nm high rectangular protrusions referred to as

5
1
0
2

 

g
u
A
8

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
0
1
9
1
0

.

8
0
5
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

anti-notches. Two wire widths were chosen for study, 320
and 150 nm, and both ends of the wire were connected to
diamond shaped pads to allow controlled over the forma-
tion of DWs. Nanostructures were fabricated first by an
EBL/lift off process onto one half of the membrane. Dur-
ing the fabrication of the nanostructures using EBL/lift
off technique, four large area rectangles were also fab-
ricated onto the other half of this membrane. Identical
structures were written inside these large rectangles con-
taining a same film of permalloy (Py), as shown in Fig.
1(b), using FIB. This was done to ensure that the same
film thickness and quality of the deposited Py was used
for patterning using both the techniques.

FIG. 1: (a) Schematic of the nanowire geometry. The distance
between the anti-notches has been reduced for this schematic
indicated by vertical bars. (b) TEM image shows the nanos-
tructures written by EBL and FIB techniques.

For FIB patterning, a FEI Nova NanoLab 200
SEM/FIB workstation with a 10 nm full-width-half
maximum Ga+ ion probe (energy of 30 keV and current
of 10 pA) was used. The FIB pattern generation involved
a two-step vector milling strategy described elsewhere
[9]. Cross-sectional (x-sectional) TEM samples of the
patterned nanowires were prepared by FIB milling to
observe the details of the physical structure of the
nanowires around their edges. The preparation of the
x-sectional TEM samples of thin films is always chal-
lenging, however, the fragility of the Si3N4 membrane
makes it even more so. Nevertheless, attempts were
made to make the TEM sample as thin as possible
which is desirable for good imaging. To obtain a thinner
sample and to provide additional support during milling
process prior to load the sample inside the FIB chamber,
approximately 200 nm Al was deposited in to the back
side of the membrane. X-sectional TEM samples were
prepared using the FIB based in situ lift-out technique
which is described in reference [13]. Conventional TEM

2

was used to investigate the physical structure while the
Fresnel mode of Lorentz TEM (LTEM) was used to
image the magnetic behavior of DWs in the patterned
nanowires. LTEM imaging was performed in a Philips
CM20 field emission gun TEM equipped with Lorentz
lenses and suitable for performing in situ magnetizing
experiments [14].

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

A. Structural characterizations

Figures 2(a-d) show TEM bright field (BF) images
of the plan view of 320 nm wide nanowires patterned
by EBL (a,c) and FIB (b,d). These images reveal poly-
crystalline films with well defined anti-notches (Figs.
2(a, b)) produced by both methods. The measured edge
roughness was of the order of the mean grain size 5 -10
nm observed in the continuous film. The grain structure
of the EBL nanowires, as shown in Fig. 2(c), reveal
a log-normal distribution [15] of the grain size peaked
around this mean value. For wires fabricated by FIB,
significant grain growth was observed up to a distance
of 30 to 40 nm from the wire edges, as marked by circles
in Fig. 2(d). The size of these larger grains varied from
20 to 30 nm. However, the grain size distribution in
the center of the FIB patterned wires is similar to the
EBL/continuous film. Therefore, the differences between
the physical nanostructures of the patterned nanowires
are clearly associated with the regions close to the edge
of the wires. In a related study this effect was observed
for nanoelements with a width of < 100 nm where the
grain growth was seen in the whole of the structure and
actually was seen to be amorphous when the width was
less than 60 nm [16]. In that study the proximity of the
edges meant that there was effectively no non-irradiated
region in the centre of the structure unlike in this study.

X-sectional samples of the patterned nanowires were
prepared by FIB lift-out technique and bright field TEM
images were recorded to observe the morphology of the
nanowires, particularly around their edges. Figures 2(e,f)
show TEM bright field images of the wire edges of a 320
nm wide EBL nanowire. The individual layers are la-
beled in image Fig. 2(e).
In the x-sectional images of
the EBL sample, Figs. 2(e,f) the top layer is an elec-
tron beam deposited platinum (Pt) protective layer. The
white band around the edge structure is residual PMMA
and its thickness is approximately 3-5 nm which is con-
sistent with the measured residual PMMA thickness af-
ter acetone removal in lift-off [17]. Furthermore these
images reveal a tapered edge structure of the patterned
nanowire. Formation of the tapered edge structure in this
case may be due to shadowing associated with a build-up
of metal during evaporation on the residual PMMA resist
to the side of the nanowire. By comparison x-sectional

3

In the case of the EBL patterned nanowire, the residual
PMMA meant that such an intermediate layer was un-
necessary. A comparison of the edge structure from the
x-sectional images of the EBL and FIB indicate that in
both cases the edge profile is not vertical but tapered,
though in the case of the FIB structure the tapering is
slightly less symmetric. Whilst in the case of the EBL
nanowires the tapering may be in part due to residual
resist, in the case of the FIB nanowires this is clearly due
to the interaction of the Ga+ ion beam with the film dur-
ing the milling process. However in both cases the edge
structure can be described as well defined. A x-sectional
TEM image from a FIB milled 150 nm wide wire, Fig.
2(j), also demonstrates a well defined edge profile of this
narrower wire consistent with that observed in the wider
nanowires.

From the plan view and cross-sectional TEM bright
field images, Fig. 2 it is apparent that the main difference
between the wires fabricated by the two processes is the
grain structure observed along the edges of the nanowires,
in particular the formation of larger grains along edges of
the FIB milling nanowires. The purpose of focused Ga+
beam milling here is to generate isolated patterns of mag-
netic thin film without the need for the time consuming
lithography process. However, it is well known that the
profile of the Ga+ beam has a long exponential tail in
addition to the central Gaussian profile of the ion beam
[18, 19]. Therefore, during the sputtering process, the
Ga+ irradiation and implantation from the extended tail
of the ion beam may affect the ferromagnetic properties
of the Py along the edges of the nanowires. Modifica-
tion of the ferromagnetic properties including reduction
of saturation magnetization of magnetic thin film sys-
tems due to ion implantation/irradiation have been re-
ported earlier [20 -- 25]. Notably these investigations were
performed by ion irradiation/implantation on continu-
ous films and property modifications arose as a direct
result of the ion implantation/irradiation the thin film
systems. By contrast, in the present investigation, the
observed modification occurring along the wire edges of
the FIB milled Py nanowires appear to be due to residual
irradiation from the extended tail of the Ga+ ion beam.
This point will be further discussed in the micromagnetic
modeling section C of this paper.

B. Magnetic characterization

In situ magnetizating experiments were carried out us-
ing the Fresnel mode of Lorentz TEM to investigate and
compare the magnetic behavior of DWs as they propa-
gate along the EBL and FIB patterned nanowires. For-
mation of the DWs at the corner position between the
pad and the wires were achieved by applying a magnetic
field close to the hard axis of the nanowire and then re-
laxing the field to zero as described in reference [26]. For
nanowires of 320 nm width and 20 nm thickness, the fa-
vored wall structure is a vortex DW (VDW) consistent

FIG. 2: (Color online) TEM bright field images of the plan
view of 320 nm wide nanowires patterned by EBL (a,c) and
FIB (b,d). Circle marked regions indicate grain growth along
FIB patterned nanowire edge. X-sectional TEM bright field
images showing the wire edges of the 320 nm wide nanowires
patterned by EBL (e,f) and FIB (g,h), respectively. The in-
dividual layers are labeled in (e) and (g). Furthermore figure
(i) shows schematically the individual layers of image (g). X-
sectional image (j) is showing the one edge of a 150 nm wide
FIB patterned nanowire.

TEM images, Figs. 2(g,h) show the wire edges of a 320
nm wide FIB milled nanowire. Figure 2(i) is a schematic
showing the individual layers of 2(g). To distinguish be-
tween the Py layer and Pt over layer, about 5 nm of Al
was deposited on top of the Py prior to Pt deposition.

with the DW structure phase diagram [27]. Fresnel im-
ages, Figs. 3(a and c), show counter clockwise (ccw) and
clockwise (cw) vortex domain wall (VDW) structures, re-
spectively, in EBL patterned nanowires.

4

FIG. 3: Formation of the ccw VDW (a) and cw VDW (c) at
the zero field in 320 nm wide EBL patterned nanowires. DWs
of different chiralities were formed by applying a magnetic
field at different angles counter clockwise from the y-axis and
relaxing to zero. For the formation of a ccw VDW, a magnetic
field was applied at an angle of 2-4 degrees whereas for a cw
VDW formation, the angle of the applied magnetic field was
increased to 10-12 degrees. (b and d) are the corresponding
schematics of (a and c). 'A' and 'B' indicate the black thick
fringe at the upper edge of the diamond shaped pad and lower
edge of the straight wire, respectively. 'C' denotes the vortex
core.

In the Fresnel mode of LTEM, the magnetic DW con-
trast is clearly visible along with edge contrast appearing
along the wire edges [10]. In Fresnel images, Figs. 3(a
and c), the appearance of a thick black fringe along the
upper edge of the diamond shaped pad (marked by A)
and lower edge of the straight wire (marked by B) clearly
indicates that these two sections are magnetized in op-
posite directions and is consistent with a DW existing
between the pad and the wire. The appearance of the
vortex, with central section as white or black (indicated
by C), depends on the sense of rotation of the magne-
tization around it. Also visible in Fig.3 is a dark Y-
shaped contrast at the anti-notches. From the schemat-
ics in Figs. 3(b and d) it can be seen that this results
from the magnetization in the nanowire following the
edge of the anti-notch resulting in the Y-shaped domain
wall structure. Following the formation of DWs, a mag-

FIG. 4: Fresnel images of a ccw VDW at zero field in 320 nm
wide nanowires patterned by EBL (a) and FIB (b). (d and
e) are showing ccw VDW is pinned prior to the anti-notches.
State after DW depinning is showing (f and g). Completion of
reversal in EBL wire is showing (j). Schematic interpretation
of (a) and (b) is (c) and (f and g) are (h and i), respectively.

netic field was applied along the wire axis to drive the
VDWs towards the anti-notches of the nanowires. DW
propagation experiments were carried out for both chi-
ralities of VDW in nanowires of both width patterned by
EBL and FIB. In terms of reproducibility of the mag-
netizing behaviour there were 4 identical nanowires for
each width and preparation method and each measure-
ment based on 5 repeat cycles of 4 identical nanowires.
Therefore the fields quoted in the following results are
based on an average of 20 measurements for each event
for a given chirality in a wire of a given width for each
preparation method. The error comes from the spread
of the recorded data. Each set of measurements started
from the states shown in Fig. 3 and then followed the
sequence propagation, pinning and depinning as the field
increased. The state would then be reset and the mea-
surement repeated. Fresnel images, Figs. 4(a and b)
show of a ccw VDW at zero field in a 320 nm wide wire
patterned by EBL and FIB, respectively. Figure 4(c) is

the corresponding schematic showing the magnetization
distribution deduced from the images. By applying a
magnetic field of 17 Oe, the DWs move and are pinned
prior to the anti-notches of both EBL and FIB wires as
shown in Figs. 4(d and e), respectively. The ccw VDW
was pinned prior to the anti-notch as the magnetization
in the leading domain of the DW has a component an-
tiparallel to that in the adjacent anti-notch as can be seen
from Fig. 4(c). A further field increase to ∼ 62 Oe re-
sults in the DW depinning and propagating through the
anti-notch of the EBL nanowire leaving the wire nearly
uniformly magnetized, Fig. 4(f). After the depinning of
the DW, a vortex of ccw chirality appears inside the anti-
notch as a black spot, Fig. 4(f). At an applied magnetic
field of ∼ 57 Oe, Fig. 4(g), the magnetization reversal is
completed in the FIB nanowire without a vortex forming
inside the anti-notch. Here the thicker dark fringe runs
along the upper edge of the wire and weak white DW con-
trast appears inside the anti-notch after the depinning of
the DW, which has a similar but opposite configuration
to the black Y-shaped domain wall observed earlier but
modified by the applied field. The schematic interpreta-
tion of Figs. 4(f and g) are (h and i), respectively. Fi-
nally at ∼ 210 Oe, the vortex structure annihilated from
the anti-notch of the EBL patterned nanowire, Fig. 4(j).
Fresnel images, Figs. 5(a and b) show the situation for
cw VDWs at zero field in 320 nm wide wires fabricated
by EBL and FIB, respectively with a schematic of the
magnetization shown in Fig.5(c). An applied magnetic
field of 12 Oe for both cases results in the leading part
of the DW entering the anti-notches as shown in Figs.
5(d,e). As the leading part of the VDWs now have a
component parallel to the magnetization at the left side
of the anti-notch the VDWs and the Y-shaped domain
walls effectively merge. A further field increase to ∼ 57
Oe results in the DW depinning from the anti-notch of
the EBL nanowire, Fig. 5(f). It is noted that after the
depinning of the DW, a ccw vortex structure formed in-
side the anti-notch of the EBL nanowire, as seen by the
presence of the black spot in Fig. 5(f). In the FIB milled
nanowire, the DW depins at ∼ 52 Oe and weak white
DW contrast is formed inside the anti-notch as shown
in Fig. 5(g). Figures 5(h and i) are the schematics of (f
and g), respectively. Under the application of a magnetic
field of ∼ 210 Oe, the vortex structure is totally removed
from the anti-notch of the EBL nanowire, Fig. 5(j).

These results show that DW depinning fields at anti-
notches are higher for the ccw vortex domain walls com-
pared to those of the cw vortex domain walls in accor-
dance with previous results on triangular shaped anti-
notches in EBL nanowires [10].
In the present inves-
tigation however the comparison of the EBL and FIB
nanowires indicates that DW depinning fields at the anti-
notches are lower for the FIB nanowires compared to
their equivalent EBL nanowires for both cw and ccw
VDWs. Furthermore it is noted that after reversal of the
EBL nanowires residual ccw vortex structures are present
inside the anti-notch for both chiralities of the incoming

5

FIG. 5: Fresnel images (a) and (b) are showing a cw VDW at
zero field in 320 nm wide nanowires fabricated by EBL and
FIB, respectively. (d and e) are showing part of the cw VDW
merged inside the anti-notches. (f and g) are showing state
after DW depinning. (j) is showing completion of reversal in
EBL wire. (c) is the schematic of (a and b) and (h and i) are
the schematics of (f and g), respectively.

DWs. These are not observed in the FIB nanowires after
depinning. The presence of these vortices appears to be
unrelated to the depinned DWs and it is noted that the
same field is required to annihilate the vortex in both
cases. Thus the presence of the vortex after depinning
does appear to be a residual structure in the anti-notch
and not connected to the depinned wall.
Experiments were also performed on EBL and FIB pat-
terned 150 nm wide nanowires which contain anti-notches
of width 320 nm and height 140 nm. Like the 320 nm
wide wires, a ccw vortex structure appeared inside the
anti-notches of the EBL nanowires after the DWs of
both ccw and cw chiralities had depinned from the anti-
notches. The vortex annihilation field for both chiralities
of DWs in 150 nm wide nanowires was again seen to be
at ∼ 210 Oe, i.e.
the same as for 320 nm wide EBL
nanowires. Again this vortex structure did not appear
after the DWs depinned from the anti-notches of the FIB

TABLE I: Domain wall depinning field dependency on the
fabrication technique and chiralities of the DWs in 320 and
150 nm wide nanowires. Each experimentally measured field
is an average from 4 identical nanowires each of which were
measured from separate magnetizing cycles. Field values are
the mean values of the repeated experiments and error bars
represent their standard deviation. Domain wall depinning
fields for rectangular (rec.) and sloped (slop.) edge profiles of
the nanowires obtained from micromagnetic simulations are
also included inside the bottom part of the table.

Fabrica Wire
width
tion
tech.
(nm)

EBL
FIB
EBL
FIB

320
320
150
150

Domain wall
depinning field

Vortex

annihilation

field (Oe)

(Oe)
cw

ccw
62 ± 2 57 ± 2 210 ± 8
57 ± 2 52 ± 2 − − −−
150 ± 5 118 ± 5 210 ± 8
129 ± 5 100 ± 8 − − −−

Micro
320 (rec. edge) 160
magnetic 320 (slop. edge) 120
150 (rec. edge) 360
simu
lation
150 (slop. edge) 320

100
100
200
190

300 (ccw/cw VDW)
240 (ccw/cw VDW)
300 (cw VDW)
240 (cw VDW)

patterned nanowires at this width. Table 1 gives the DW
depinning field dependency on the fabrication technique
and the chiralities of the DWs along with vortex annihi-
lation field where appropriate. DW depinning fields are
higher for the narrower wires compared to the wider wires
but also show that FIB nanowires have lower depinning
fields for each chirality of DW at both widths.

The comparative study of the DW depinning in the
EBL and FIB nanowires have shown that the depinning
fields are comparable in both cases although consistently
lower for the FIB nanowires.
It has been seen from
another study that nanoelements created by FIB with
widths less than 100 nm were not able to be determined
as magnetic using LTEM [16].
In that case the whole
of the magnetic structure appeared to be modified by
residual irradiation from the FIB, whereas in this study
there is a clearly defined affected edge and non affected
internal regions.
In the next section we show how mi-
cromagnetic simulations can be used to gain an insight
into the differing behavior of the EBL and FIB nanos-
tructures based on the possible edge modification in the
case of the latter and taking account of previous studies
of ion implantation of permalloy.

C. Micromagnetic simulation

The micromagnetic simulations were carried out us-
ing freely available code, object oriented micromagnetic
framework (OOMMF) developed by the NIST group at

6

Gaithersburg [28]. The parameters used for the simu-
lations were standard for Py: saturation magnetization
Ms = 8.6 × 106 A/m, exchange stiffness constant A =
1.3 × 10−11 J/m, magnetocrystalline anisotropy K =
0 and damping coefficient α = 0.5. A cell size of 5 ×
5 × 5 nm3 was used. Micromagnetic simulations were
performed for ccw and cw VDWs in 320 nm and 150 nm
wide nanowires which contain 320 nm wide and 140 nm
high anti-notches.

TEM cross-sectional images, Fig.

2(e-h, j) demon-
strated a variation in the edge profile of the patterned
nanowires. Therefore, to conduct simulations initially
two different edge profiles were considered. These were
shown as schematic cross-section of the wires in Figs.
6(a,b) in which (a) was designed as an ideal structure
with a rectangular cross-section and (b) was structured
based on the TEM x-sectional image Fig. 2 (h) being rep-
resentative of the experimental edge profile which was
sloping rather than vertical. Such an edge profile was
modelled by dividing the thickness of the wire into four
separate layers, as shown in the schematic 6(b). The bot-
tom layer (layer 1) had the dimensions of the width of
the wire with the subsequent layers (layers 2-4) having
their width reduced by three cells thus creating a tapered
edge profile.

FIG. 6: Simulations were carried out by varying the edge
profiles. Schematic cross-section of the nanowires with rect-
angular edge (a) and sloped edge (b). (c) Ms were reduced
up to a distance of 40 nm in the nanowire (b). The width of
the nanowires has been reduced for this schematic indicated
by vertical bars.

The DW depinning fields obtained from micromagnetic
simulations are shown in the lower part of table 1 along
with experimentally observed field values. These simu-
lations have confirmed the chirality dependence of the
depinning fields i.e.
the ccw vortex wall has a higher
depinning field than the cw wall. The simulations also
show that the wider wires have lower depinning fields
than the narrower ones which are consistent with the ex-
perimental observations. The effect of the edge structure
is evident in that the characteristic fields, i.e. DW depin-
ning and vortex annihilation, are higher for a rectangular
edge profile compared to that of the sloped edge profile

for all cases considered here. As is the case with pre-
vious OOMMF simulations the predicted fields are all
much larger than the observed experimental values with
simulations being carried out at 0 K [7, 29], however the
trends of the higher characteristic fields for rectangular
edges narrower wires are reproduced. Whilst the sloped
edge structure accounts for lower characteristic fields like
the experimental FIB structures it does still retain the
residual vortex structure after DW depinning. Although
in the case of the ccw VDWs in the 150 nm wide wires
the simulated depinning fields are greater than the vor-
tex annihilation field seen in the cw DW depinning. Figs.
7(a-d) shows the sequence of Fresnel images simulated
for a ccw DW moving through a nanowire, which shows
good agreement with the process for the EBL fabricated
nanowire in Fig. 4.

7

more than 1 at.% of Ga. However, a dramatic reduc-
tion in the Curie temperature was observed for doses of
1 x 1016 ions/cm2 for direct Ga+ implantation. It may
also be noted here that doping Ni80Fe20 alloys with other
metal such as Cr also causes the Curie temperature and
saturation magnetization to be reduced, and that at 8
at% Cr the alloy becomes paramagnetic at room temper-
ature [30]. Therefore, to clarify the experimentally ob-
served two-step reversal process in the case of EBL pat-
terned nanowires and one step process for FIB nanowires,
micromagnetic simulations were also carried out by vary-
ing the saturation magnetization (Ms) of Py along the
nanowire edges.

To observe the influence of the reduction of Ms along
the wire edge, a similar wire structure for Fig. 6(b) but
with a reduced Ms up to a distance of 40 nm from the wire
edge was considered as shown schematically in the blue
marked region in Fig. 6(c). As was mentioned earlier,
in the plan view bright field image Fig. 2(d), most of
the large size grains were observed up to a distance of 40
nm from the wire edge of the FIB milled nanowire. This
was the basis for reducing Ms in simulations up to this
distance of the wire edges.

FIG. 7: (Color online) Simulated Fresnel images (a-d) show
the magnetization reversal process in 320 nm wide nanowire
(sloped eedge) with uniform Ms throughout the wire. DW
has moved through the anti-notch and a vortex structure is
formed inside the anti-notch, as shown in (c). Simulated
Fresnel images (e-g) are showing the reversal process of the
nanowire of same geometry but with Ms is 50% along the
wire edge. DW has moved through the anti-notch without
the presence of the vortex structure, as shown in (g).

These initial simulations have shown that the char-
acteristic DW depinning fields are reduced for a sloped
edge nanowire; however, they do not explain why resid-
ual vortices are not seen in the anti notches after DW
depinning. As mentioned earlier, it was assumed that
during the milling process of the nanowires by focused
Ga+ beam, the wire edges were affected by Ga+ irradi-
ation due to the extended tail of the Ga+ beam. Previ-
ously studies have look at the effect on films irradiated
homogeneously with 30 keV Ga+, for example investi-
gation [20] was carried out using Magneto-optic Kerr
effect measurements at room temperature on Ni80Fe20
(15.5nm)/Ni80Cr20(9.0nm). This study demonstrated
coercivity changes in a 100 µm2 area even for mildly
dosed (8.0 x 1014 ions/cm2) samples that did not receive

FIG. 8: (Color online) DW depinning and vortex annihilation
fields as a function of Ms along the wire edge. The simulations
were carried out for a ccw VDW in a 320 nm wide and 20 nm
thick wire as shown in the schematic cros-section 6(c).

The simulations were performed by varying Ms up to
a distance of 40 nm from the edge along the edges for
a ccw VDW in a 320 nm wide and 20 nm thick wire as
shown in the schematic cross-section Fig. 6(c). The Ms
value in the central part of the wire remained at 100%.
The dimension of the anti-notch was fixed as before, i.e.
320 nm wide and 140 nm high. Ms values along the wire
edge were reduced from 100% down to 40% and results
were plotted in Fig. 8. This figure shows that if Ms is
reduced along the wire edges the DW depinning field de-

creases by around 20% compared to the unmodified wire.
Additionally it can be seen that the vortex annihilation
field inside the anti-notch also reduces with reduced Ms
along the wire edge. However when Ms is reduced to 50
% along the wire edge, the ccw vortex structure is no
longer formed inside the anti-notch of the wire. To illus-
trate this the reversal process for a 50 % Ms along the
wire edge of a 320 nm wide wire is shown in Figs. 7(e-g).
This suggests that the experimental results, Figs.4 and
5(b,e and g) for FIB patterned nanowires may be consis-
tent with reduced edge Ms, due to Ga ion implantation.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In the present investigation, high quality nanostruc-
tures were fabricated by using EBL and FIB techniques
and characterized by TEM imaging. Bright field images
revealed significant grain growth along the wire edges of
the FIB patterned nanowires. However, TEM x-sectional
images have confirmed that well defined edge profile
result for nanowires patterned using both EBL and
FIB techniques. Magnetizing experiments using the
Fresnel mode of Lorentz TEM revealed differences in
the magnetic behavior between EBL and FIB patterned
nanowires, notably small but reproducible differences in
the depinning fields and the absence of residual vortices
in the anti-notches of the FIB nanowires. Evidence from
micromagnetic simulations suggest that this different
reversal process between the nanowires fabricated by the
FIB techniques may be associated with the reduction of

8

Ms along the wire edges. Such a reduction of Ms along
the wire edges reduces the DW depinning fields and is
consistent with the experimentally observed magneti-
zation behavior of the FIB milled nanowires.
Indeed
this point is consistent with a study of nanoelements of
with dimensions < 100 nm in which the whole element
appeared to be affected by the residual irradiation from
the FIB [16]. The difference in the reversal process
between EBL and FIB patterned nanowires are also
demonstrated by the formation of a ccw vortex structure
inside the anti-notches of the EBL nanowires after the
depinning of DWs in contrast to the FIB nanowires
where no such vortex structures formed. The presence
of these vortices could potentially be very problematic
for nanowire applications where series of domain walls
pass through wires in proposed memory and logic
applications [1, 2]. Therefore for the wire dimensions
considered here FIB may actually be beneficial as a
fabrication method. However it must be noted that the
edge modification induced by the FIB method does have
implications particularly if smaller dimensions are to
be fabricated and this certainly needs to be carefully
considered when using this method.

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author (M A Basith) would like to acknowledge
sincerely University of Glasgow and ORSAS for providing
financial support.

*Email address: m.basith@physics.gla.ac.uk

[1] D. A. Allwood, G. Xiong, C. C. Faulkner, D. Atkinson,

33 (2005).

D. Petit, R. P. Cowburn, Science 309, 1688 (2005).

[13] J. Mayer, L. A. Giannuzzi, T. Kamino, and J. Michael,

[2] S. P. Parkin, M. Hayashi, and L. Thomas, Science 320,

MRS Bulletin, 32, 400 (2007).

190 (2008).

[3] M. T. Bryan, T. Schrefl, and D. A. Allwood, Appl. Phys.

Lett. 91, 142502 (2007).

[14] J. N. Chapman, A. B. Johnston, L. J. Heyderman, S.
McVitie, W. A. P.Nicholson, and B. Bormans, IEEE
Trans. Magn. 30, 4479 (1994).

[4] D. Atkinson, S. Eastwood, and L. K. Bogart, Appl. Phys.

[15] D.T. Carpenter, J.M. Rickman, K. Barmak, J. Appl.

Lett. 92, 022510 (2008).

Phys. 84, 5843 (1998).

[5] R. D. McMichael and M. J. Donahue, IEEE Trans. Magn.

33, 4167 (1997).

[6] D. A. Allwood, G. Xiong, and R. P. Cowburn, Appl.

Phys. Lett. 85, 2848 (2004).

[16] X. Kong, S McVitie, J. N. Chapman, J. M. W. Weaver
and C. D. W. Wilkinson, J Vac. Sci Tech., submitted for
publication.

[17] D. S. Macintyre, O. Ignatova, S. Thoms, I. G. Thayne,

[7] D. Petit, A. V. Jausovec, D. Read, and R. P. Cowburn,

J. Vac.Sci. Technol. B 27(6), 2597 (2009).

J. Appl. Phys. 103, 114307 (2008).

[8] M. Klaui, H. Ehrke, U. Rdiger, T. Kasama, R. E. Dunin-
Borkowski, D. Backes, L. J. Heyderman, C. A. F. Vaz, J.
A. C. Bland, G. Faini, E. Cambril, and W. Wernsdorfer,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 102509 (2005).

[9] D. McGrouther, S. McVitie, J. N. Chapman, and A. Gen-

tils, Appl. Phys. Lett. 91, 022506 (2007).

[18] J. Melngailis, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 5 469, (1987)
[19] A. Kieslich, Reithmaier J P and Forchel A, J. Vac. Sci.

Technol. B 12 3518, (1994).

[20] W. M. Kaminsky, G. A. C. Jones, N. K. Patel, W. E.
Booij, M. G. Blamire, S. M. Gardiner, Y. B. Xu, and J.
A. C. Bland, Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 1589 (2001).

[21] D. Ozkaya L, R. M. Langford, W. L. Chan, and A. K.

[10] K. J. O'Shea, S. McVitie, J. N. Chapman, and J. M. R.

Petford-Long, J. Appl. Phys. 91, 9937 (2002).

Weaver, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 202505 (2008).

[22] J. Fassbender and J. McCord, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88,

[11] M. T. Bryan, D. Atkinson and R P Cowburn, Appl. Phys.

252501 (2006).

Lett. 85, 3510 (2004).

[12] D. Atkinson , Journal of Physics: Conference Series 17,

[23] C.-M. Park and J.A. Bain, J. Appl. Phys. 91, 6830 (2002).
[24] C.-M. Park and J.A. Bain, IEEE Trans. Magn. 38, 2237

(2002).

[25] J. Fassbender, J. von Borany, A. Mcklich, K. Potzger,W.
Mller, J. McCord, L. Schultz and R. Mattheis, Phys. Rev.
B 73, 184410 (2006).

[28] M. J. Donahue and D. G. Porter, Report No. NISTIR
6376 (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD, 1999).

[29] A. Himeno, T. Okuno, T. Ono, K. Mibu, S. Nasu, and

[26] C. Brownlie, S. McVitie, J. N. Chapman, and C. D. W.

T. Shinjo, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 286, 167 (2005).

Wilkinson, J. Appl. Phys. 100, 033902 (2006).

[30] R. M. Bozorth, Ferromagnetism (Piscataway:

IEEE)

[27] Y. Nakatani, Y. A. Thiaville, J. Miltat, J. Magn. Magn.

1993.

Mater. 290, 750 (2005).

9

