Polarization singularities on high index

nanoparticles

Aitzol Garcia-Etxarri∗

Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), Donostia - San Sebastian 20018, Spain

E-mail: aitzolgarcia@dipc.org

Abstract

In this article, we study the emergence of polarization singularities in the scattered fields

of optical resonators excited by linearly polarized plane waves. First, we prove analytically

that combinations of isotropic electric and magnetic dipoles can sustain L surfaces, and C lines

that propagate from the near-field to the far field. Moreover, based on these analytical results,

we derive anomalous scattering Kerker conditions trough singular optics arguments. Secondly,

through exact full-field calculations, we demonstrate that high refractive index spherical res-

onators present such topologically protected features. Furthermore, we calculate the polariza-

tion structure of light around the generated C lines, unveiling a Möbius strip structure in the

main axis of the polarization ellipse. These results prove that high-index nanoparticles are ex-

cellent candidates for the generation and control of polarization singularities and that they may

lead to new platforms for the experimental study of the topology of light fields around optical

antennas.

6
1
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

7
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
5
6
3
4
0

.

1
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

KEYWORDS: Singular optics, Polarization singularities, High refractive index nanoparticles,

Kerker conditions

∗To whom correspondence should be addressed

1

Mathematical singularities may be defined as points where the value of a function in not de-

fined or is not well behaved. In physics, singularities arise whenever a mathematical formalism

fails at describing some particular physical phenomenon. Often, these singularities drop hints on

interesting phenomena happening in a particular physical process. Singularities in wave physics

have been studied since 1830 in different kinds of waves (for a good overview, see1). In wave

optics, two general types of singularities have been identified and studied.2

In certain situations, the polarization of light is uniform throughout space and thus, light can

be mathematically described as a position dependent complex scalar wave multiplied by a constant

polarization vector. In these situations, singularities arise whenever the amplitude of the wave is

zero. In such cases, even though the amplitude of the wave si well defined, its phase cannot be

unambiguously determined. These singularities receive the name of Phase singularities. Around

these singularities, the phase of the scalar field varies gradually from 0 to 2πq, where q is an integer

(positive or negative) named the topological charge of the singularity. These phase singularities,

also known as nodal lines or vortices, have been widely studied in the recent past due to their

ability to carry orbital angular momentum in their vicinity.3,4

Nevertheless, in most situations, light presents a spatially varying polarization structure and the

vectorial nature of electromagnetic fields cannot be disregarded. In these situations, optical vortices

occur very rearly since all of the three field components need to be exactly zero in order to have a

real singularity. Over a frequency cycle, the real part of the complex vector draws an ellipse (the

polarization ellipse) and, as we proceed to detail, singularities arise as Polarization Singularities

either when light is circularly polarized or linearly polarized. Following the formalism introduced

by M. R. Dennis and M. V. Berry,2,5 the vectors defining the major (α) and minor (β ) axes of the
polarization ellipse and its surface normal (N) (see Fig.1) can be expressed as:

(cid:16)
E∗√
(cid:16)
E∗√

(cid:17)
(cid:17)

E· E

E· E

α =

β =

1
√
E· Eℜ
1
√
E· Eℑ

2

(1)

(2)

Figure 1: Polarization ellipse traced by an arbitrary electric field as a function of time (t). Green
arrows represent the cartesian coordinates, α and β the major and minor axes of the polarization
ellipse and N its surface normal.

N = ℑ (E∗ × E)

(3)

where E = Exx +Eyy +Ezz is the complex electric field vector, ℜ(·) and ℑ(·) represent the real and
imaginary parts of a complex function and the polarization scalar ϕ = E·E = ExEx + EyEy + EzEz.
If light is linearly polarized, the polarization ellipse collapses to a line and it is not possible to
define a unique vector which is normal to the polarization ellipse. In those situations, N = 0. In
three dimensions, the spatial positions where this condition is fulfilled arrange in surfaces, named

L surfaces.

On the other hand, when light is circularly polarized, the major and minor axes of polarization

cannot be unambiguously determined, and both α and β vectors become identically zero. Since ϕ

is a complex scalar function, its vanishing requires both its real and the imaginary parts to be zero.

Thus, in 3D space, the points of circular polarization form lines (C lines). On the other hand, as in

scalar optical vortices, the phase of ϕ around any zero spans all the possible values from 0 to 2πl,

l being the topological charge of the singularity. Around any small closed curve surrounding a C

line, the major and minor axes of the polarization ellipse generate a multi twist ribbon with l half

3

twists.6,7 Thus, as it was recently experimentally demonstrated,8 for l = 1, both α and β form a

Möbius strip around any small closed path arund a C line.

Since the seminal contributions by Nye9 -- 11 polarization singularities in optical fields have

been studied extensively for their intrinsic theoretical interest. C lines and L surfaces have been

identified in contexts as disparate as the skylight,12 speckle fields,13,14 tightly focused beams,15,16

crystal optics,17 photonic crystals18,19 and plasmonic systems.20,21 Nevertheless, experimental

applications of such topological features remained elusive until very recently. In the recent past,

polarization singularities have proved to be useful in quantum information applications.22,23

In this paper, we explore the possibility of creating such polarization singularities in optical

antennas illuminated by linearly polarized light. We prove that systems presenting a simultaneous

isotropic electric and a magnetic polarizability (αe and αm respectively) are among the simplest

nanostructures capable of sustaining C lines and L surfaces. Moreover, we prove the anomalous

scattering Kerker conditions based on singular optics arguments alone. We verify our ideas by

performing full field simulations on the optical response of a high index dielectric nanosphere ilu-

minated by a linearly polarized planewave. We track the C lines generated by a Si nanoparticle over

all the radiation regions and unveil the Möbius strip structure of the main axis of the polarization

ellipse around them.

Results and Discussion

Dielectric nanoantennas made of materials with a high index of refraction have been intensely

studied in the recent past due to their ability to sustain lossless electric and magnetic resonances

in the visible and IR parts of the spectrum.24 On the one hand, their lossless character has proved

crucial in the fabrication of metamaterials and metasurfaces not limited by ohmic losses.24 -- 26 On

the other hand, the combination of electric and magnetic dipolar responses allows for an additional

degree of freedom in the manipulation of light that has proved instrumental in surface enhanced

chiral spectroscopy,27 and in shaping the radiation properties of optical antennas.28,29 In this ar-

4

Figure 2: Electric far-field amplitude and polarization distribution of: (a) an electric dipole, blue
arrow, (b) a magnetic dipole, red arrow, and (c) a combination of an electric and a magnetic dipole.
For isolated electric and magnetic dipoles (a and b) iluminated by linearly polarized light, all the
scattered fields are linearly polarized. On the contrary, for a system radiating as a simultaneous
set of electric and magnetic dipoles (c), interference makes the scattered field to be generally
elliptically polarized.

ticle, we focus in the polarization aspect of the fields scattered by such resonators illuminated by

linearly polarized light.

Let us start by considering the far field radiation characteristics of an electric dipole. Excited
by linearly polarized light (Einc = E0x, Hinc = H0y), the induced electric dipolar moment can be
expressed as p = ε0αeEinc = E0ε0αex, ε0 being the vacuum permittivity and αe the electric dipolar
polarizability The far field scattering of such dipolar moment is given by:

EED
scat =

k2
ε0

Gep =

k2
ε0

[(n× p)× n]

eikr
4πr

(4)

where Ge is the electric Green's tensor in the far field approximation and k is the wavenumber of
light in vacuum. r = r− r0 is the distance between the position of the dipole (r0) and the obser-
vation point r, and n = nxx + nyy + nzz is the unit vector in the direction of r− r0. Figure 2a plots
the far field electric field amplitude (EED
scat) with superimposed electric field polarization vectors.
As expected, the fields scattered by a linearly polarized electric dipole are linearly polarized in all

spatial directions.

The situation is similar for an isotropic magnetic dipole polarizability αm excited by linearly

5

polarized light.
m = αmHinc = H0αmy, and the scattered fields in the far field can be calculated from:

In such a system, the induced magnetic dipolar moment can be expressed as

scat = iZ0k2Gmm = −Z0k2 (n× m)
EMD

eikr
4πr

(5)

where Z0 in the impedance of free space and Gm is the magnetic Green's tensor in the far field
scat) with superimposed
approximation. Figure 2b presents the far field electric field amplitude (EMD
In this case, the electric field vectors circulate around the y
electric field polarization vectors.

polarized magnetic dipole, but the polarization is also linear in the entire solid sphere.

Nevertheless, this situation changes when considering the scattering coming from a particle

with simultaneous isotropic electric and magnetic polarizabilities excited by linearly polarized

light. In this case, the scattered fields are a superposition of the fields radiated by both the electric

and magnetic dipole:

EED+MD
scat

=

k2
ε0

Gep + iZ0k2Gmm.

(6)

EED
scat and EMD

scat are not necessarily in phase and they are not parallel. Thus, the polarization
state in these systems (Figure 2c) becomes spatially inhomogeneous. Since the scattered fields

become generally elliptically polarized, it is logical to think that these kind of systems may sustain

polarization singularities.

We will first search for L surfaces. Calculating N by substituting Eq.6 into Eq.3, one obtains:

N = ℑ(αeα∗

m)nxny.

(7)

Thus, both the xz plane and the yz plane are L surfaces (N = 0) in the radiation region.

The analytical determination of C lines is more intricate. Deriving the polarization scalar ϕ

from Eq.6 yields:

ϕ = α2

mn2

x + α2

e + (α2

e + α2

m)n2

z + 2αeαmnz.

(8)

6

Consequently, light will be circularly polarized if

mn2

x + α2

e n2

y + (α2

e + α2

m)n2

z + 2αeαmnz

ℜ(cid:0)α2
ℑ(cid:0)α2

mn2

x + α2

e n2

y + (α2

e + α2

m)n2

z + 2αeαmnz

.

Since n is a unit vector, a third condition also holds,

n2
x + n2

y + n2

z = 1

(cid:1) = 0
(cid:1) = 0

(9)

(10)

(11)

Note that none of these equations do depend on r. Thus, for some particular αe and αm, nx, ny

and nz are the only unknowns in this set of 3 equations and their solutions specify the directions

on which the C lines propagate on the far field. It is interesting to note that geometrically, Eq.9

and Eq.10 describe two hyperbolic functions, and that Eq. 11 describes a unitary sphere. So,

for particular values of the complex electric and magnetic polarizability, the direction of the C

lines will be determined by the intersection of these three surfaces. An analytic solution to this

equations does exist, but unfortunately, it is too cumbersome to provide any intuitive interpretation.

Nevertheless some interesting conclusions can be extracted under some particular assumptions.

If αe = αm, it can be easily proved that equations 9-11 determine that a single C line exists in the
direction of n = −z. Nonetheless, according to Eq.7, the z axis belongs to a L surface. So, accord-
ing to this formalism, light should be both linearly and circularly polarized in the back-scattering

trajectory. This is only feasible if no fields are radiated in this direction. This phenomenon is the

well known Kerker condition for zero back-scattering,28 -- 31 but, to the best of our knowledge, it has
never been proved before based on singular optics arguments. For αe = −αm, the second Kerker
condition for zero forward-scattering can also be easily derived following the same procedure.

To verify the existence of C lines in a realistic system, we consider the optical response of a

150 nm silicon sphere illuminated by linearly polarized light. Figure 3a shows the geometrically

7

Figure 3: (a) Extinction cross section of a Si nanosphere (150 nm radius) illuminated by linearly
polarized light. Blue line represents the geometrically normalized total extinction cross section.
The yellow and red lines are the magnetic and electric dipolar contributions to the total extinction
cross section. (b) Geometrical solution to equations 9 - 11 for λ = 1110 nm. Eq.9 (red surface) and
Eq.10 (green surface) describe two hyperbolic functions, while Eq. 11 (yellow surface) describes
the unitary sphere. (c) Phase and (d) amplitude of ϕ as a function of position, for the 150 nm
Si sphere illuminated by a 1110 nm linearly polarized plane wave, calculated in the far-field, 20
µm away from the origin. Blue and red arrows indicate the direction of the induced electric and
magnetic dipoles respectively. As expected, zeros in (d) correspond to phase singularities in (c),
indicating the presence of polarization singularities in those directions.

.

normalized extinction cross section of this system (blue line) calculated using Mie theory. Yellow

and red lines plot the contribution of the dipolar electric and magnetic terms in the Mie series to

the total extinction spectrum. As expected, the lowest energy peak at 1110 nm corresponds to the

first order b term in the Mie series (b1) . This resonance is of magnetic dipolar character and it
can be associated to a magnetic polarizability through24 αm = i
µ0
peak at 860 nm is the lowest order electric resonance and its dipolar polarizability can be inferred

b1. On the contrary, the

(cid:17)−1

(cid:16) k3

6π

8

from the a1 term in the Mie series through αe = iε0
a1. Figure 3b plots the surfaces defined
by equations 9, 10 and 11 for λ = 1110nm. Four intersection points can be identified (blue dots).

6π

(cid:16) k3

(cid:17)−1

These points indicate the directions on which C lines generated by the silicon nanoparticle will

propagate through the far field.

To verify our analytical predictions, we solve exactly Maxwell's equations using the Boundary

Element Method32 -- 34 for such a system. In particular, we calculate ϕ at a distance 20 µm away

from the Si nanoantenna. Figure 3c and Figure 3d plots the phase of ϕ and its absolute value.
It easy to see that, at the predicted positions, ϕ presents exact zeros while the phase becomes
singular. Along these lines, the scattered fields are exactly circularly polarized, their handedness
being determined by the sign of n· N which is positive for right handed fields and negative left
handed fields [ref Dennis thesis].

Finally, we calculate the polarization structure on a 3D volume encompassing all the radiation

regions around the 150 nm Si nanoparticle excited by a 1100 nm linearly polarized plane wave. We

track the C lines from the near-field to the far-field by the procedure described in the Methods sec-

tion. Figure 4, compiles these results. The blue sphere represents the Si nanoparticle while the red

and green lines emerging from the sphere are the left and right handed C lines respectively. These

calculations reveal that even though in the far field the C lines evolve radially as straight lines, in

the near-field they curve in a non trivial manner. Moreover, according to Freunds's predictions,6,7

taking a closed loop around any point on a C line, any of the axes of the polarization ellipse should

form a multi-twist strip,8 with the number of twists being the equal to the topological charge of
the C line. In this particular case, since l = 1
2 for all of the C lines, a Möbius strip should be
formed around any loop around any of the C lines. We verify this polarization structure through

the calculation of the major axis of the polarization ellipse on several circles encompassing the C

lines along their trajectory. The inset in figure 4, is a zoom of one of these calculations. For the

purpose of displaying the Möbius strip clearer, one half of the major axis of the polarization ellipse

is depicted as a green arrow and the other half in blue. The single twist in the ribbon is evident and

consistent all along every C line.

9

Figure 4: C lines around the Si nanoparticle for λ = 1110nm in all the radiation regions. The
silicon nanoparticle is represented by the blue sphere. Green and red lines are the left and right
handed C lines respectively. The main axis of the polarization ellipse forms a single twist Möbius
strip in any curve enclosing a C line. The inset is a zoom of this polarization structure around one
particular C line.

Conclusions

In conclusion, we have analytically and numerically proved that high index nanoparticles support

polarization singularities that propagate from the near-field to the far-field. In particular, C lines

arise from the interference of the fields scattered by electric and magnetic isotropic dipolar exci-

tations. The study of polarization singularities is a rapidly growing field of research, on one hand

due to the intrinsic theoretical interest of the topology of light fields and on the other hand be-

cause of the upcoming applications on quantum information systems. This theoretical contribution

proves that combinations of electric and magnetic dipoles supported by high index nanoparticles

create such topologically protected features and may facilitate new experimental platforms to study

polarization singularities.

10

Methods

Identification and tracking of C lines around optical antennas

In order to identify and track the C lines emerging from an optical antenna, we first calculate the

vectorial electric fields on a meshed surface covering the nanoparticle at a short distance form its
periphery (E0(r)). In particular, to compute the results presented in Fig. 4, we choose to use the
Metallic Nanoparticle Boundary Element Method MATLAB toolbox.34 Starting from E0(r), the
polarization scalar can be readily computed as:

ϕ0(r) = u(r) + iv(r) = E0(r)· E0(r) = Ex(r)Ex(r) + Ey(r)Ey(r) + Ez(r)Ez(r).

(12)

The objective is to find the exact zeros of ϕ on the surface surrounding the nanoparticle. In
order to do so, we first find the local minima of ϕ on the calculated mesh, and then run a mini-
mization routine (fminsearch.m in Matlab) on ϕ(r) using the identified minima as seeds for the
minimization routine. After verifying that these minima are actual zeros of ϕ(r), we take them
as the starting points of the C lines (r0). The direction of the C line can be calculated though the
following expression:2

d(r0) =

1
2

∇ϕ∗(r0)× ∇ϕ(r0) = ∇u(r0)× ∇v(r0)

(13)

Having calculated the origin of the C line and its direction, it is easy to calculate the seed of

the next point on the C line as

with

rs
1 = r0 + ld(r0),

l = l0

d(r0)· r
d(r0)· r

(14)

(15)

being the target distance to the next point on the line, l0, corrected for the fact that d may point
towards the nanostructure. Minimizing ϕ around this new position, it is easy to calculate the exact

11

position of the next point on the C line. One can compute the entire trajectory of the C line by

following this procedure recursively.

Acknowledgement

We thank J. J Saenz for insightful discussions and XX for the careful reading of the manuscript. A.

G.-E. received funding from the Fellows Gipuzkoa fellowship of the Gipuzkoako Foru Aldundia

through FEDER "Una Manera de hacer Europa"

Supporting Information Available

This material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org/.

References

1. Berry, M. Making waves in physics. Nature 2000, 403, 21.

2. Dennis, M. R. Topological singularities in wave fields. University of Bristol (PhD Thesis)

2001,

3. Soskin, M. S.; Gorshkov, V. N.; Vasnetsov, M. V.; Malos, J. T. Topological charge and angular

momentum of light beams carrying optical vortices. Physical Review A 1997,

4. Molina-Terriza, G.; Torres, J. P.; Torner, L. Twisted photons. Nature Physics 2007, 3, 305 -- 310.

5. Berry, M. V. Index formulae for singular lines of polarization. Journal of Optics A: Pure and

Applied Optics 2004, 6, 675.

6. Freund, I. Hidden order in optical ellipse fields: I. Ordinary ellipses. Optics communications

2005, 256, 220 -- 241.

7. Freund, I. Cones, spirals, and Möbius strips, in elliptically polarized light. Optics communica-

tions 2005, 249, 7 -- 22.

12

8. Bauer, T.; Banzer, P.; Karimi, E.; Orlov, S.; Rubano, A.; Marrucci, L.; Santamato, E.;

Boyd, R. W.; Leuchs, G. Observation of optical polarization Mobius strips. Science 2015,

347, 964 -- 966.

9. Nye, J. F. Lines of Circular Polarization in Electromagnetic Wave Fields. Proceedings of the

Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 1983, 389, 279 -- 290.

10. Nye, J. F. Polarization Effects in the Diffraction of Electromagnetic Waves: The Role of

Disclinations. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering

Sciences 1983, 387, 105 -- 132.

11. Nye, J. F. Natural Focusing and Fine Structure of Light; Institute of Physics: Bristol, 1999.

12. Berry, M. V.; Dennis, M. R.; Lee, R. L., Jr Polarization singularities in the clear sky. New

Journal of Physics 2004, 6, 162.

13. Flossmann, F.; Kevin, O. H.; Dennis, M. R.; Padgett, M. J. Polarization singularities in 2D and

3D speckle fields. Physical Review Letters 2008, 100, 203902.

14. Egorov, R. I.; Soskin, M. S.; Kessler, D. A.; Freund, I. Experimental measurements of topolog-

ical singularity screening in random paraxial scalar and vector optical fields. Physical Review

Letters 2008,

15. Lindfors, K.; Priimagi, A.; Setälä, T.; Shevchenko, A.; Friberg, A. T.; Kaivola, M. Local

polarization of tightly focused unpolarized light. Nature Photonics 2007, 1, 228 -- 231.

16. Schoonover, R. W.; Visser, T. D. Polarization singularities of focused, radially polarized fields.

Opt. Express 2006, 14, 5733 -- 5745.

17. Flossmann, F.; Schwarz, U. T.; Maier, M.; Dennis, M. R. Polarization singularities from un-

folding an optical vortex through a birefringent crystal. Physical Review Letters 2005, 95,

253901.

13

18. Burresi, M.; Engelen, R.; Opheij, A.; Van Oosten, D. Observation of polarization singularities

at the nanoscale. Physical Review Letters 2009, 102, 033902.

19. Rotenberg, N.; le Feber, B.; Visser, T. D.; Kuipers, L. Tracking nanoscale electric and magnetic

singularities through three-dimensional space. Optica 2015, 2, 540.

20. de Hoogh, A.; Rotenberg, N.; Kuipers, L. Optical singularities in plasmonic fields near single

subwavelength holes. Journal of Optics 2014, 16, 114004.

21. de Hoogh, A.; Kuipers, L.; Visser, T.; Rotenberg, N. Creating and Controlling Polarization

Singularities in Plasmonic Fields. Photonics 2015, 2, 553 -- 567.

22. Le Feber, B.; Rotenberg, N.; Kuipers, L. Nanophotonic control of circular dipole emission.

Nature communications 2015, 6.

23. Young, A. B.; Thijssen, A.; Beggs, D. M.; Kuipers, L.; Rarity, J. G.; Oulton, R. Polarization

engineering in photonic crystal waveguides for spin-photon entanglers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015,

115, 153901.

24. Garcia-Etxarri, A.; Gómez-Medina, R.; Froufe-Perez, L. S.; López, C.; Chantada, L.; Schef-

fold, F.; Aizpurua, J.; Nieto-Vesperinas, M.; Sáenz, J. J. Strong magnetic response of submi-

cron Silicon particles in the infrared. Optics Express 2011, 19, 4815 -- 4826.

25. Moitra, P.; Yang, Y.; Anderson, Z.; Kravchenko, I. I.; Briggs, D. P.; Valentine, J. Realization

of an all-dielectric zero-index optical metamaterial. Nature Photonics 2013, 7, 791 -- 795.

26. Arbabi, A.; Horie, Y.; Bagheri, M.; Faraon, A. Dielectric metasurfaces for complete control

of phase and polarization with subwavelength spatial resolution and high transmission. Nature

nanotechnology 2015, 10, 937 -- 943.

27. Garcia-Etxarri, A.; Dionne, J. A. Surface enhanced circular dichroism spectroscopy mediated

by non-chiral nanoantennas. Physical Review B 2013, 87, 235409.

14

28. Geffrin, J. M.; García-Cámara, B.; Gómez-Medina, R.; Albella, P.; Froufe-Pérez, L. S.;

Eyraud, C.; Litman, A.; Vaillon, R.; González, F.; Nieto-Vesperinas, M. et al. Magnetic and

electric coherence in forward- and back-scattered electromagnetic waves by a single dielectric

subwavelength sphere. Nature communications 2012, 3, 1171.

29. Person, S.; Jain, M.; Lapin, Z.; Sáenz, J. J.; Wicks, G. Demonstration of zero optical backscat-

tering from single nanoparticles. Nano letters 2013, 13, 1806 -- 1809.

30. Kerker, M.; Wang, D. S.; Giles, C. L. Electromagnetic scattering by magnetic spheres. J. Opt.

Soc. Am. 1983, 73, 765 -- 767.

31. Zambrana-Puyalto, X.; Fernandez-Corbaton, I.; Juan, M. L.; Vidal, X.; Molina-Terriza, G.

Duality symmetry and Kerker conditions. Optics letters 2013, 38, 1857.

32. García de Abajo, F.; Howie, A. Retarded field calculation of electron energy loss in inhomo-

geneous dielectrics. Physical Review B 2002, 65, 115418.

33. García de Abajo, F.; Howie, A. Relativistic Electron Energy Loss and Electron-Induced Photon

Emission in Inhomogeneous Dielectrics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998, 80, 5180 -- 5183.

34. Hohenester, U.; Trügler, A. MNPBEM -- A Matlab toolbox for the simulation of plasmonic

nanoparticles. Computer Physics Communications 2012,

15

