Characteristic Tip–Substrate Capacitance Studied Using Force 

Spectroscopy Method of Atomic Force Microscopy 

Reynier I. Revilla§, Yan–Lian Yang*, Chen Wang* 

 

 

Key Laboratory of Standardization and Measurement for Nanotechnology, the Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, 

§ Present address: Center for Advanced Studies of Cuba, Havana 19370, Cuba 

P. R. China 

 

*Corresponding authors: Tel: 86-10-82545559, Fax: 86-10-62656765 

Email: yangyl@nanoctr.cn (YLY); wangch@nanoctr.cn (CW) 

 

ABSTRACT:  The  characteristic  tip–substrate  capacitance  is  crucial  for  understanding 

the  localized  electrical  properties  in  atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM).  Since  it  is  highly 

dependent  on  tip  geometrical  features,  estimation  of  the  tip–substrate  characteristic 

capacitance  for  a  given  probe  is  very  complex,  involving  empirical  measurements  and 

numerical  simulations.  In  this  paper  we  propose  a  facile  approach  to  study  the  tip–

substrate  characteristic  capacitance  using  AFM  force  spectroscopy  technique.  In  this 

scheme,  an  analytical  expression  is  considered  to  model  the  tip–sample  interaction,  in 

which  the  coefficients  are  directly  dependent  on  the  tip–substrate  capacitance.  This 

method  avoids  any  complex  simulation  involving  irregular  shape  of  AFM  tips. 

Additionally,  it  considerably  reduces  amount  of  experimental  data  needed  for  the 

calculation  compared  with  other  techniques.  The  work  presented  here  also  corroborates 

that  for  tip–sample  separation  lower  than  200  nm,  the  parallel  plate  capacitor 

approximation is not very appropriate to describe the tip–substrate capacitive interaction, 

but  an  intermediate  approximation  between  a  sphere–plane  and  a  cone–plane  geometry 

seems to be more appropriate. 

 

Keywords:  Characteristic  capacitance,  force  spectroscopy,  atomic  force  microscopy 

(AFM), dielectric film 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Electric  force  microscopy  (EFM)  and  Kelvin  probe  force  microscopy  (KPFM)  are 

widely  used  and  very  powerful  techniques  for  characterizing  electrical  behaviors  of 

nanostructures.1  By  using  EFM  and  directly  imaging  the  surface  potential  variations  at 

nanoscale,  valuable  information  have  been  obtained  regarding  the  nature  of  charge 

transport,2–8  conductivity,9,10  and  charge 

injection8,11–13 

in  a  great  number  of 

systems/materials.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to  carry  on  quantitative  measurements  of 

dielectric  properties  such  as  charge  density  and  dielectric  permittivity,  surface  potential 

imaging  alone  is  not  enough.  This  is  principally  because  the  tip–surface  electrostatic 

interaction  includes  contributions  from  several  sources,  for  instance,  tip–substrate 

capacitance,  static  charge  at  interfaces,  boundaries  and/or  defects,  remnant  polarization, 

and so on. To facilitate quantification techniques, extensive efforts have been put forth to 

model tip–substrate capacitance for the interpretation of EFM images and measurements. 

This characteristic capacitance is highly dependent on geometrical features. Commercial 

EFM  probes  are  of  great  complexity,  i.e.  an  integrated  structure  including  an 

approximately  spherical  tip  apex,  a  pyramidal/conical  tip  body  and  a  plate  cantilever.14 

Several approaches have been used in the literature to model the scaling behavior of the 

tip–substrate characteristic capacitance. The parallel–plate capacitor geometry (2C/z2 ~ 

z–3) is one of the most extensively used due to its simplicity.15,16 However, the power law 

of z–3 could not describe most of the experiments results due to the discrepancy between 

the  parallel–plate  capacitor  model  and  the  practical  tip–substrate  geometry.  In  order  to 

solve this problem, probe–plane characteristic capacitance (2C/z2 ~ zβ) is proposed,17,18 

while  a  universal  value  (β)  to  describe  the  power  law  dependence  is  still  under  debate. 

For  certain  range  of  tip–sample  distance,  experimental  results  have  shown  that  the  tip–

substrate  capacitance  lies  intermediately  between  a  sphere–plane  (2C/z2  ~  z–2)  and  a 

cone–plane  (2C/z2  ~  z–1)  geometry  (β  from  –1.4  to  –1.6),18–20  which  is  in  good 

agreement  with  an  approximately  conical  tip  with  an  spherical  ending.  It  has  been 

previously discussed that the apex and conical portions of an EFM tip are responsible for 

the greater part of the interactions when the tip is not far away from the sample surface, 

and  the  contribution  from  the  cantilever  plate  becomes  more  appreciable  at  larger  tip–

sample  distances.21  Other  researchers  have  also  considered  the  total  tip–sample 

capacitance  as  the  sum  of  all  the  contributions  from  the  different  parts  of  the  EFM 

probe.20,22,23  Nevertheless,  to  estimate  the  characteristic  capacitance  for  a  given  probe, 

complex procedures are usually required involving empirical measurements of capacitive 

force characteristics combined with numerical simulations. 

Qi  et  al.24  developed  a  method  to  determine  the  dependence  of  the  tip–substrate 

capacitance on the tip–sample separation based on the effect of the sample surface bias. 

The characteristic capacitance could be determined by a single integration step, avoiding 

the introduction of additional linear terms as reported in previous studies.22 This method 

is of great convenience when the experiments are performed on a conductive sample. If a 

dielectric film is deposited on the substrate, high values of the substrate bias could induce 

polarization  within  the  film  and  therefore  introduce  an  extra  term  in  the  interaction 

between  the  tip  and  the  sample,  which  makes  the  interpretation  of  the  data  more 

complicated. 

In  this  paper  we  present  a  simple  method  to  study  the  scaling  behavior  of  the 

characteristic capacitance between a conductive AFM tip and a substrate covered with a 

dielectric  film.  Force  spectroscopy  technique  in  combination  with  an  analytical 

expression modeling the tip–substrate interaction forces is used to experimentally obtain 

a  series  of  parameters  directly  dependent  on  the  tip–substrate  capacitance.  In  this  way, 

one  can  further  calculate  the  characteristic  power–law  of  the  system’s  capacitance  with 

any commercially available AFM system without considering the tip geometry effect. 

 

II. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION 

AFM measurement 

Force  spectroscopy  measurements  were  conducted  in  ambient  conditions  with  a 

commercial  atomic  force  microscope  (Dimension  3100,  Nanoman  II,  Bruker).  A 

rectangular conductive cantilever with a coating of a 3 nm Cr and 20 nm Pt–Ir film and a 

nominal  spring  constant  of  3  N/m  was  used  for  the  measurements  and  as  the  top 

electrode. The conductive substrate supporting the dielectric film was used as the bottom 

electrode. 

In order to  determine the average force curve for each external  voltage applied to  the 

tip, a series of 5 force  curves were obtained on the same sample location (the substrate 

was  always  grounded).  To  avoid  structural  damage  of  the  tip  and  the  sample,  the 

loading/unloading speed and the maximum cantilever deflection were kept relatively low, 

0.25 µm/s and less than 40 nm respectively. The probe radius was measured before and 

after  each  test  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  tip  apex  did  not  change  due  to  plastic 

deformation. This control check was carried out using the NanoScope Analysis software 

and a standard Tip Check sample (Aurora NanoDevices Inc.), which are commonly used 

to obtain accurate reconstructions of the tip apex. Measurements were made at a relative 

humidity below 20%, in order to reduce the possible influence from the condensation of 

water on the sample surface. 

Sample preparation 

An  80  nm  thick  film  of  silicon  dioxide  was  deposited  on  a  silicon  surface 

(SiO2/Si(100)) by using physical vapor deposition (PVD). Si(100) was highly doped with 

phosphorus (2–4 Ω∙cm) (from Silicon Quest Int’l) and used as the bottom electrode. PVD 

was carried out by E–beam deposition on a BOC AUTO 500 system, with a base vacuum 

of 1.6×10-6 mbar, E–beam gun electric current of 7 mA and a deposit rate of 0.6 Å/s. 

 

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

In previous works, we have proposed an analytical expression to model the total force 

acting on a biased EFM tip, FV(z), placed on top of a conductive substrate covered with a 
dielectric film.25, 26 

  ( )  

 

 

[

  

  

   ( )   ]     

 

 

 ( )           ( )                                              (1) 

Where  F0(z)  is  the  tip–sample  interaction  at  zero  voltage,  which  is  principally 

associated with van der Waals interaction. C is the effective tip–substrate capacitance and 

z  is  the  effective  tip–substrate  distance,  thus  C/z  is  the  first  derivative  of  the  tip–

substrate  capacitance  with  respect  to  the  tip–substrate  distance.  a(z)  is  a  factor  related 

only to the tip–sample distance and tip geometry, χs is the sample susceptibility and Qim 

the image charge on the conductive tip induced by the static charge in the sample below 

the tip apex. 

According  to  the  procedure  described  in  our  earlier  works25,  26  we  can  associate  the 

coefficients of Eq. (1) to the functions g(z) and h(z) so that: 

   ( )                                                                                                       (2) 

 ( )  

  

  

and 

 ( )    ( )                                                                                                              (3) 

These two functions can be directly obtained by measuring force–distance curves at 0 

V and two other different voltages applied between the probe and the substrate.25, 26 

From Eqs. (2) and (3), Eq. (4) can be easily derived: 

  

  

 

 

   

 ( )     ( )                                                                                                  (4) 

Eq.  (4)  is  a  first–order  linear  differential  equation,  which  can  be  solved  using  a 

numerical integration method. In order to solve Eq. (4), we have considered the following 

initial  condition,  based  on  the  fact  that  the  tip–sample  interaction  force,  and  therefore 

functions g(z) and h(z), are approximately 0 for large tip–sample separation. 

  
  (   )

                                                                                                                       (5) 

The parameter Qim in Eq. (4), which represents the image charge on the tip induced by 

the  static  charge  on  the  sample  surface  below  the  tip  apex,  is  generally  unknown. 

Therefore,  to  resolve  the  differential  equation  represented  below,  we  have  assigned 
values to Qim ranging from 4 to approximately 103 elemental charges (e–), and solve Eq. 

(4)  for  each  one  of  those  values  given  to  Qim.  In  other  words,  we  have  carried  out  a 

sensitivity  analysis  to  determine  how  different  values  of  the  parameter  Qim  will  impact 

the scaling behavior of the probe–sample characteristic capacitance. 

Fig. 1(a) shows functions g(z) and h(z) obtained from force–distance curves measured 

on the SiO2 film at 0, 3, and 6 V. These two functions are approximately 0 for relatively 

large tip–sample separation as mentioned above, which confirms the use of the boundary 

value  represented  in  Eq.  (5).  Fig.  1(b)  portrays  the  numerical  solution  of  Eq.(4)  for  a 

selection  of  values  assigned  to  the  parameter  Qim  using  the  functions  g(z)  and  h(z) 

portrayed in Figure 1(a). 

FIG.  1.  (a)  Value  of  g(z)  and  h(z)  versus  tip–sample  distance,  obtained  from  force–

curves  measured  on  a  SiO2  film  at  0,  3,  and  6  V  applied  between  the  probe  and  the 

substrate. (b) Numerical solution of Eq. (4) using functions g(z) and h(z) portrayed in (a), 

 

for a selection of values assigned to the variable Qim. 

 

In  a  previous  work  by  Qi  et  al.24  an  analytical  expression  of  the  tip–substrate 

capacitance was proposed to study its scaling behavior: 

      (        )

 

                                                                                                   (6) 

Here A1, A2 and zeff are constants, where zeff is the parameter to correct the tip–sample 

distance  z  to  accommodate  the  effective  charge  position,  and  α  is  associated  with  the 

geometrical  characteristics  of  the  probe.  It  can  be  easily  noted  from  Eq.  (6)  that  the 

parameter  β  mentioned  above,  which  is  associated  with  the  power  coefficient  of  the  z–

dependence of the second derivative of the capacitance, is related to parameter α through 

the  relation:  β  =  α  –  2.  In  order  to  study  the  scaling  behavior  of  the  tip–sample 

capacitance,  the  capacitance  curves  obtained  from  Eq.  (4)  were  fitted  using  Eq.  (6). 

Consequently, for every value of the parameter Qim, one value of the power coefficient α 

can be obtained. Fig. 2 shows the values of α versus Qim. The data fitting with Eq. (6) was 

conducted  for  values  of  z  ranging  from  30  to  180  nm  approximately.  Values  of  tip–

sample  separation  lower  than  30  nm  were  ignored  because  when  the  probe  is  relatively 

close to the sample surface, this gets into an unstable regime in which the tip jumps into 

contact  with  the  sample.25  It  can  be  clearly  observed  in  Fig.  2  that  coefficient  α 
experiences almost no variation for Qim ranging from 10 to 103 e– approximately. Hence, 

α is relatively independent of the value of Qim, which is in complete agreement with the 

fact  that  α  is  mainly  related  to  the  probe  geometrical  features.  Values  of  α  obtained 

during the fitting are principally in the range from 0.33 to 0.41. This range is represented 

by  the  shaded  region  in  Fig.  2.  Thus,  the  average  value  of  α  could  be  estimated  as  α  = 

0.37 ± 0.04, from which we can obtain a scaling behavior of the second derivative of the 

tip–substrate  capacitance  2C/z2  ~  z–1.63  (β  =  –1.63).  This  value  lies  intermediately 

between  the  sphere–plane  and  the  cone–plane  geometry.  Consequently,  this  could 

indicate that the parallel plate capacitor approximation is not very appropriate to describe 

the  tip–substrate  capacitive  interaction  for  tip–sample  separation  lower  than  200  nm, 

which is the main range of operation of electric force microscopy. This also confirms that 

when the tip is not far away from the sample surface the apex and conical portions of the 

tip are responsible for most part of the interactions. 

FIG. 2. Parameter α obtained from the fitting of the capacitance curves acquired from the 

numerical solution of Eq. (4) for different values of the parameter Qim. The shaded region 

 

represents values of α from 0.33 to 0.41. 

 

To  further  confirm  our  results,  the  same  measurement  was  carried  out  using  six 

different  probes  taken  from  two  different  batches  with  different  cantilever’  geometries 

(Batch  #1:  rectangular  conductive  cantilever  with  a  coating  of  Pt–Ir/Cr,  nominal  radius 

20 nm, nominal full tip cone angle 40º. Batch #2: V–shape conductive cantilever with a 

coating of Au/Cr, nominal radius 35 nm, nominal full tip cone angle 40º). For each probe 

the measurement was conducted twice. Fig. 3 portrays the values of the power coefficient 

obtained using the procedure explained above. It can be clearly observed that  the values 

of  α  are  within  the  range  from  0.36  to  0.5,  giving  a  scaling  behavior  of  the  second 

derivative of the characteristic capacitance from  z–1.5 to z–1.64. This further confirms that 

for tip–sample distance ranging from 30 to 200 nm the main capacitive interaction comes 

from the tip apex and conical part. The cantilever contribution could almost be neglected 

in this case. 

FIG.  3.  Values  of  the  coefficient  α  obtained  using  six  different  probes  taken  from  two 

different  batches  (a)  Batch  #1:  rectangular  conductive  cantilever  with  a  coating  of  Pt–

Ir/Cr,  nominal  radius  20  nm,  nominal  full  tip  cone  angle  40º.  (b)  Batch  #2:  V–shape 

conductive  cantilever  with  a  coating  of  Au/Cr,  nominal  radius  35  nm,  nominal  full  tip 

 

cone angle 40º. 

 

The procedure described above estimates the scaling behavior of the absolute value of 

the  probe–sample  capacitance  without  requiring  an  integration  constant  as  reported  in 

previous  works.  This  additional  constant  has  usually  been  considered  a  limitation, 

requiring  the  evaluation  of  capacitance  variations  with  respect  to  a  given  capacitance 

value  instead  of  the  absolute  characteristic  capacitance.22  By  knowing  this  scaling 

behavior  a  more  realistic,  yet  simple,  model  to  describe  the  electrostatic  interaction 

between  the  probe  and  the  sample  can  be  used,  avoiding  the  use/estimation  of 

geometrical parameters of the structurally complex AFM probe. 

Additionally,  if  a  dielectric  material  is  deposited  between  the  biased  probe  and  the 

substrate,  an  accurate  analytical  expression  to  model  the  tip–sample  interaction  force  is 

extremely difficult to achieve. This is due to the introduction of an additional term in the 

interaction  force  associated  with  the  induced  polarization  within  the  dielectric  film. 

However,  these  systems  (biased  AFM  probes  –  dielectric  films)  are  widely  used  for 

electrical material characterization. In this regard the model proposed here represents an 

easy  and  convenient  approach  to  obtain  the  feature  of  the  probe–dielectric–substrate 

capacitive interaction for further quantification and study of other electrical properties. 

 

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

We have proposed in this work a facile approach to study the scaling behavior of the tip 

substrate  characteristic  capacitance  by  using  AFM  force  spectroscopy  technique.  This 

method avoids any complex simulation involving irregular shape of conductive AFM tips 

and  considerably  reduces  the  amount  of  experimental  data  needed  for  the  calculation 

compared  with  other  approaches.  The  work  presented  here  also  confirms  that  for  tip–

sample  separation  lower  than  200  nm,  the  parallel  plate  capacitor  approximation  is  not 

very  appropriate  to  describe  the  tip–substrate  capacitive  interaction,  but  it  seems  more 

suitable  a  scaling  behavior  intermediate  between  the  sphere–plane  and  the  cone–plane 

geometry. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

Financial  support  from  National  Key  Basic  Research  Program  of  China  (Grant  Nos. 

2013CB934200)  and  the  National  Natural  Science  Foundation  of  China  (Grant  Nos. 

21273051) are gratefully acknowledged. 

 

 

REFERENCES 
1X. H. Qiu, G. C. Qi, Y. L. Yang and C. Wang, J. Solid State Chem. 181, 1670 (2008). 

2M. Zdrojeka, T. Melin, H. Diesinger, D. Stievenard, W. Gebicki and L. Adamowicz, J. 

App. Phys. 100,114326 (2006). 

3M. Paillet, P. Poncharal and A. Zahab, Phys. Rev. Lett.94, 186801 (2005). 

4C. A. Rezende, R. F. Gouveia, M. A. da Silva and F. Galembeck, J. Phys.: Condens. 

Matter 21, 263002 (2009). 

5T.  A.  de  Lima–Burgo,  C.  Alves–Rezende,  S.  Bertazzo,  A.  Galembeck  and  F. 

Galembeck, J. Electrostat. 69, 401 (2011). 

6R.  Wang,  S.  Wang,  D.  D.  Zhang,  Z.  Li,  Y.  Fang  and  X.  H.  Qiu,  ACS  Nano  5,  408 

(2011). 

7Z. Hu, M. D. Fischbein and M. Drndić, Nano Lett. 5, 1463 (2005). 

8C.  Y.  Ng,  T.  P.  Chen,  H.  W.  Lau,  Y.  Liu,  M.  S.  Tse,  O.  K.Tan  and  V.  S.  W.  Lim, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 2941 (2004). 

9D. Porath, A. Bezryadin, S. de Vries and C. Dekker, Nature 403, 635 (2000). 

10H.  Cohen,  T.  Sapir,  N.  Borovok,  T.  Molotsky,  R.  D.  Felice,  A.  B.  Kotlyar  and  D. 

Porath, Nano Lett.7, 981 (2007). 

11C. Y. Ng, T. P. Chen, M. S. Tse, V. S. W. Lim, S. H. Y. Fung and A. A. Tseng, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 86, 152110 (2005). 

12R. Dianoux, H. J. H. Smilde, F. Marchi, N. Buffet, P. Mur, F. Comin and J. Chevrier, 

Phys. Rev. B 71, 125303 (2005). 

13U.  Zaghloul,B.  Bhushan,P.  Pons,G.  J.  Papaioannou,F.  CoccettiandR.  Plana, 

Nanotechnology 22,035705 (2011). 

14S.  Gόmez–Moñivas,  L.  S.  Froufe,  R.  Carminati,  J.  J.  Greffet  and  J.  J.  Sáenz, 

Nanothecnology 12, 496 (2001). 

15F.  Marchi,  R,  Dianoux,  H.  J.  H.  Smilde,  P.  Mur,  F.  Comin  and  J.  Chevrier,  J. 

Electrostat. 66, 538 (2008). 

16R. Dianoux, F. Martins, F. Marchi, C. Alandi, F. Comin and J. Chevrier, Phys. Rev. B 

68, 045403 (2003). 

17S. Belaidi, P. Girard, and G. Leveque, J. Appl. Phys. 81, 1023 (1997). 

18T. D. Krauss and L. E. Brus, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4840 (1999). 

19J. Jiang, T. D. Krauss and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. B 104,11936 (2000). 

20M. J. Gordon andT. Baron, Phys. Rev. B 72, 165420 (2005). 

21S. Belaidi, P. Girard and G. Leveque, J. Appl. Phys. 81, 1023 (1997). 

22L.  Fumagalli,  G.  Ferrari,  M.  Sampietro,  I.  Casuso,  E.  Martiınez,  J.  Samitier  and  G. 

Gomila, Nanotechnology 17, 4581 (2006). 

23D. T. Lee, J. P. Pelz and B. Bhushan, Nanotechnology17, 1484 (2006). 

24G. C. Qi, H. Yan, L. Guan, Y. L. Yang, X. H. Qiu, C. Wang, Y. B. Li and Y. P. Jiang, 

J. Appl. Phys. 103, 114311 (2008). 

25R. I. Revilla, X. J. Li, Y. L. Yang and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 5556 (2014). 

26R. I. Revilla, Y. L. Yang and C. Wang, Surf. Interface Anal. 47, 657 (2015). 

