Localization of Excess Temperature Using Plasmonic Hot Spots 

in Metal Nanostructures: 

Combining Nano-Optical Antennas with the Fano Effect 

4 

Larousse Khosravi Khorashad,1 Lucas V. Besteiro,1 Zhiming Wang,2 Jason Valentine,3  

Alexander O. Govorov11  

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio 45701, United States 

2Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and 

Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, PR China; State Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin 

Films and Integrated Devices, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 

 

3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37212, 

Chengdu 610054, PR China  

 

USA 

 

 

Abstract 

 

It is challenging to strongly localize temperature in small volumes because heat transfer is a 

diffusive process.  Here we show how to overcome this limitation using electrodynamic hot 

spots  and  interference  effects  in  the  regime  of  continuous-wave  (CW)  excitation.  We 

introduce a set of figures of merit for the localization of temperature and for the efficiency of 

the plasmonic photothermal effect.  Our calculations show that the temperature localization in 

a  trimer  nanoparticle  assembly  is  a  complex  function  of  the  geometry  and  sizes.  Large 

nanoparticles  in  the  trimer  play  the  role  of  the  nano-optical  antenna  whereas  the  small 

                                                           
 

1 Corresponding author: Govorov@ohio.edu; ++1-740-593-9430 

 
 
1 

 
 

nanoparticle in the plasmonic hot  spot  acts as a nano-heater.  Under the  peculiar  conditions, 

the temperature increase inside a nanoparticle trimer can be localized in  a hot spot region at 

the small heater nanoparticle and, in this way, a thermal hot spot can be realized.  However, 

the overall power efficiency of temperature generation in this trimer is much smaller than that 

of  a  single  nanoparticle.  We  can  overcome  the  latter  disadvantage  by  using  a  trimer  with  a 

nanorod. In the trimer assembly composed of a nanorod and two spherical nanoparticles, we 

observe  a  strong  plasmonic  Fano  effect  that  leads  to  the  concentration  of  optical  energy 

dissipation in the small heater nanorod. Therefore, the power efficiency of generation of local 

excess  temperature  in  the  nanorod-based  assembly  greatly  increases  due  to  the  strong 

plasmonic  Fano  effect.  The  Fano  heater  incorporating  a  small  nanorod  in  the  hot  spot  has 

obviously  the  best  performance  compared  to  both  single  nanocrystals  and  a  nanoparticle 

trimer. The principles of heat localization described here can be potentially used for thermal 

photo-catalysis, energy conversion and bio-related applications.    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
2 

 

Introduction 

Efficient and localized heat generation using plasmonic nanocrystals and optical excitation is 

an interesting and  active field  of research.  The  motivations  for this  research direction  come 

from  both  current  and  potential  applications  of  optically-excited  nanoparticles.  These 

applications include a wide range of bio-related methods and approaches,1,2,3,4,5 photothermal 

and hot-electron mechanisms of catalysis,6,7 thermal actuation of bio-systems,8 efficient light-

to-heat  conversion,9,10  boiling  and  steam  generation,11,12,13  local  temperature  sensing  in 

nanoscale systems,14 and so on.  

 

Optically-excited nanocrystals have large absorption cross sections and, therefore, are 

able to generate heat very efficiently15. Strength and localization of heat generation strongly 

depend on a geometry and composition of plasmonic nanostructures and, therefore, one can 

design nanostructures for special photothermal applications. The regimes of photo-heating of 

a  matrix  can  be  collective  or  local.    The  collective  heating  is  realized  in  a  large  and  dense 

ensemble of nanoparticles (NPs)16,17,18 where heat fluxes from individual NPs add up leading 

to high collective temperature.  This regime is suitable for the purpose of uniform heating of 

large  areas  that  can  be  used  in  biology,  for  example.  The  collective  heating  is  typically 

realized  in  the  regime  of  CW-illumination9,16  when  the  system  has  enough  time  to  come  to 

the non-equilibrium steady state with increased temperature. The local regime of heating can 

provide  high  local  temperatures  in  certain  confined  volumes  within  or  in  the  vicinity  of  a 

plasmonic  nanostructure.9,16,27  The  local  and  collective  heating  mechanisms  depend  on  the 

composition  and  dimensions  of  a  complex.16,17  For  some  NP  assemblies,  collective 

electromagnetic  and  heating  effects  can  be  understood  within  the  effective-medium 

 
 

 
 
3 

approaches.11,19  Moreover,  the  local  temperature  distribution  and 

the  efficiency  of 

temperature generation depend on the shape of a nanocrystal.20   

One  of  the  ideas  for  localized  temperature  generation  is  a  nanostructure  with  local 

electromagnetic hot  spots.   For the  first  time,  such a nanostructure  was  proposed in  Ref.  16. 

The complex proposed in Ref. 16 consisted of three NPs and had a linear geometry. Two large 

NPs  played  a  role  of  an  antenna  and  another  small  NP  was  placed  into  the  hot-spot  region 

between the two large antenna NPs. As a result, it was calculated16 that the small NP heater 

should  be  able to  generate  much higher temperature because of the antenna hot-spot  effect.  

However, this problem of the NP-NP-NP heater was not investigated in detail in Ref. 16 and, 

in  general,  we  will  show  in  our  study  that  this  thermal  hot-spot  problem  is  not 

straightforward.  Recently,  the  heterogeneous  Ag-Au-Ag  trimer  was  investigated  in  detail  in 

Refs.21,22,  and  it  was  shown  that  the  temperature  generation  inside  such  assembly  can  be 

greatly  enhanced  in  the  pulsed  regime.  More  studies  of  photothermal  effects  in  nanocrystal 

assemblies of various geometries can be found in Refs.23,24. In particular, Ref.24 investigated 

the photothermal effect in nanorods in the regime of the Fano effect.  

Here  we  study  nanocrystal  assemblies  with  hot  spots  to  create  strong  and  localized 

heating. We compose assemblies from spherical nanoparticles (NPs) and nanorods (NRs). In 

our  geometry,  large  NPs  play  a  role  of  an  antenna,  whereas  a  small  nanocrystal  (sphere  or 

nanorod) works as a heater. Due to the electromagnetic hot-spot effect, our structures exhibit 

strongly-enhanced  temperature  generation  and  strongly-localized  temperature  distributions.  

The formation of thermal hot spots in our resonant structures requires peculiar conditions that 

depend  on  the  geometry  and  sizes  of  nanocrystals.  In  particular,  we  demonstrate  the 

formation  of  the  thermal  hot  spots  in  the  NP-NP-NP  trimers  with  narrow  gaps  and  for  the 

regime  of  the  Fano  resonance  in  the  NP-NR-NP  geometry.  It  is  interesting  to  introduce 

 
 

 
 
4 

figures  of  merit  for  the  photothermal  effects  in  simple  and  complex  nanostructures.  Such 

figures  of  merit  have  been  already  formulated  for  the  efficiency  of  heat  generation  using 

various  materials  and  for  the  temperature-related  optical  nonlinearity.22,25  In  our  study,  we 

introduce novel types of figures of merit for the spatial localization of temperature and for the 

power efficiency of localized temperature generation.  We then apply our figures of  merit to 

the  NP-NP-NP  and  NP-NR-NP  complexes.  We  show  that,  under  special  conditions,  the 

electromagnetic hot-spot effect leads to the formation of thermal hot spots. Here we describe 

such  conditions  for  the  regime  of  CW-illumination.  We  should  briefly  discuss  important 

differences between our present  model and the model of the Ag-Au-Ag heater calculated in 

Ref.22.   Ref.22 investigated the pulsed regime  and the thermal  nonlinearity of the plasmonic 

response of a small Au-NP. Our paper deals with homogeneous Au-Au-Au complexes in the 

CW-excitation regime. The pulsed-excitation and CW-excitation regimes have very different 

properties  and,  in  particular,  the  degree  of  localization  of  temperature  can  be  very  different 

for  these  regimes.26,27  Other  differences:  (1)  We  describe  the  thermal  effect  for  the  Fano 

regime  with  nanorods,  when  the  temperature  generation  and  efficiency  become  strongly 

amplified; (2) We introduce the figures of merit for the localization and efficiency of photo-

temperature  for  the  plasmonic  heaters  and  test  these  figures  of  merit  for  some  important 

geometries.  Finally, the original proposal for the NP-NP-NP plasmonic heater was published 

in  our  paper  back  in  200616,  but,  in  the  present  study,  we  elaborate  on  this  problem  and 

formulate  the  conditions  for  the  appearance  of  thermal  hot  spots  in  the  CW-illumination 

regime.   

This  paper  is  focused  on  the  CW-illumination  regime.    The  advantages  of  the  CW-

regime are obvious: (1) It is easier to realize such regime; (2) This regime is relevant to the 

energy  applications  since  solar  illumination  should  be  considered  as  continuous.  For  both 

 
 

 
 
5 

excitation regimes (i.e. for the  CW- and pulsed illuminations), one can localize temperature 

using  specially-designed  nanostructures,  but  these  two  regimes  may  give  very  different 

temperature distributions and should be considered separately.  

Figure 1 shows the systems studied in this paper. Such nanoscale heater systems can 

be  fabricated  using  bio-functionalization  of  NPs  or  with  lithography.13,28,29  The  current 

literature has a large number of cases related to both approaches. NP and NR trimers can be 

assembled  using  the  approach  of  DNA-origami.30,31,32,33  Figure  1d  shows  a  sketch  of  a 

possible DNA-based bio-assembly for photo-heating effect. Plasmonic nanostructured heaters 

can  also  be  fabricated  or  arranged  on  functionalized  surfaces  using  a  combination  of 

lithography and bio-assembly.13,28,34 We finally note that local temperature measurements in a 

nanoscale heater can be made by attaching a temperature-sensitive emitting nanocrystal14 to 

the hot element of assembly.  

 

 
 

 
 
6 

 

Figure 1: (a-c) Thermal and electromagnetic models of nanocrystal trimers with thermal and 

electromagnetic  hot  spots.  (d)  Sketch  of  a  structure  that  can  be  assembled  using  the  DNA-

origami technique. The DNA carpet holds three nanoparticles. The system has an additional 

small platform that supports a small nanoparticle between two large plasmonic nano-spheres. 

The system is submerged in water.  

 

1.  General equations for the plasmonic heat generation 

In  the  following,  we  will  operate  with  the  function 

  that  is  a  local 

temperature increase with respect to the equilibrium temperature 

. In the absence of phase 

 
 

 
 
7 

0(,)(,)TtTtTrr0Ttransformations, heat transfer in a system composed of NPs and a matrix is described by the 

usual heat transfer equation16,26 

                       (1) 

where 

 is the temperature increase  as a  function  of  the coordinate 

 and  the time  ; 

  and 

  are  the  mass  density,  specific  heat  and  thermal  conductivity, 

respectively.  The local heat intensity 

 comes from light dissipation in Au NPs:  

,       (2) 

where 

 is the current density, 

 is the resulting electric field in 

the  system  and 

is  the  local  dielectric  constant  of  the  system.  Here  we  assume  that  the 

system is excited with the monochromatic external laser field, 

, 

where 

 is the amplitude of the electric field in the electromagnetic wave. Then, the light 

intensity as a function of time is given by 

, where 

 is the speed of 

light  in  vacuum.  For  example,  if  light  turns  on  at 

,  the  light  intensity  becomes:  

  for 

  and 

  at 

.  Here 

  is  the  dielectric  constant  of  the 

matrix.  For  the  thermal  coefficients  of  water  and  gold,  we  will  use  the  standard  literature 

numbers given in Table 1. For the electrodynamic parameters, we use the data from Palik for 

gold35  and  the  matrix  constant  of 

.  This  matrix  dielectric  constant  corresponds  to 

water. If a frame of a structure is made of DNAs or polymers, effective dielectric constants of 

such molecules are also close to the one of water.  

 
 

 
 
8 

(,)()()()(,)(,),TtckTtQttrrrrrr(,)Ttrrt)(),(rrc)(rk),(tQr2(,)(,)(,)()Im()8tQtttrjrErErr),(trj(,)Re()itteErEr)(r00(,)()ReitittekrErE0()tE2000()()/8ItctE0c0t2000/8fluxIcE0t00t001.8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table  1:  Thermal  coefficients  of  water  and  gold  used  in  the  calculations.  The  thermal 

diffusivity of a material is related to the thermal conductivity via 

.  

 

 

2.  Localization  of  temperature,  spatial  variations  of  temperature  and  the  related 

figures of merit for thermal hot spots  

How  to  characterize  the  degree  of  localization  of  phototemperature  near  optically-excited 

plasmonic NPs and, in general, spatial variations of temperature in complex systems? For this 

 
 

 
 
9 

/()difftKkc2,6,,3332,6,,33:0.143100.6101/4181:128103181930019.3129twdiffwwwtwwwtAudiffAuAuAutAuAuAuWaterkmKcsWkmKkggcmmJckgKGoldkmKcsWkmKkggmcmJckgKpurpose, we propose the following simple figures of merit. Figure 2 illustrates these physical 

parameters. The first figure of merit is the localization length of temperature,  

.       (3) 

Here 

  is  the  size  of  a  plasmonic  heater,  which  can  be  a  single  NP  or  a  NP  complex.  

The length 

is the dimension of the heated area where the local temperature increase 

  is  above  the  value  of 

.  We  note  that  the  maximum  temperature, 

,  can 

occur  at  a  surface  of  one  of  metal  NPs  in  our  system.    This  is  because  of  a  very  high  heat 

conductivity  of  a  metal.  In  our  cases,  we  will  always  deal  with  gold  (Table  1).  The  second 

figure of merit should describe the ability of a plasmonic structure to create large temperature 

gradients,   

,      (4) 

where  

is the maximum temperature gradient anywhere in the system and 

is 

the light  flux.  We note  that  the parameter (3) is  dimensionless and both  parameters (3) and 

(4) are independent of the incident light power. These parameters depend on architecture of a 

heater and on thermal and electromagnetic parameters of a hybrid system. We now introduce 

another  type  of  figures  of  merit,  the  relative  efficiencies  of  generation  of  local  excess 

temperature.  These efficiencies can be defined as 

(5) 

 
 
10 

 
 

 localizationlengtheatingheaterhLLheaterLheatingL()Trmax/2TmaxTmaxflux()temperaturegradientdTdlIrmax()/dTdlrfluxImaxmax,,,temperaturefluxtemperatureabsorptionfluxabsorptiontotTEffITEffQwhere 

 is the rate of total absorption in the plasmonic system in the CW-excitation 

regime. We will see that, for most interesting regimes of heating in our trimer structures, the 

maximum  temperature 

appears  at  the  surface  of  a  small  NP.  In  such  cases,  the 

parameters (5) should include 

. We note that the parameters (5) can also be 

introduced  for  the  pulsed  regime.  For  the  pulsed  regime,  we  should  define 

as  the 

maximum  temperature  increase  achieved  during  the  pulse  interval 

.  In  addition, 

 

and 

should  be  regarded  as  the  flux  and  the  heat  rate  during  the  pulse.  Then,  the 

total illumination power density should be defined as 

 and the total absorbed 

energy should be calculated as 

.  

 
 

 
 
11 

,absorptiontotQmaxTmaxat small NPTTmaxTpulsetfluxI,absorptiontotQtotfluxpulsePIt,absorptiontotpulseQt 

Figure 2:   Generic non-uniform temperature distribution around a nanoscale heater and the 

parameters involved in the spatial figures of merit.   

 

3.  Solutions and the figures of merit for a single nanoparticle heater.  

We now analyze the above figures of merit for the simplest case of a single optically-excited 

NP. This case of a single NP will serve as a reference for more complex NP assemblies. For a 

single  NP,  we  can  write  analytical  equations  for  the  CW-  and  pulsed-illumination  regimes. 

The CW-illumination regime has the following temperature distribution16,26:  

 
 

 
 
12 

,       (6)  

where 

  is  the  NP  radius  and 

  is  the  thermal  conductivity  of  water.  For  the  metal,

 and temperature inside a NP can be taken constant. It follows from Eq.6 that the 

maximum  temperature  increase  in  the  light-driven  system,  which  is  also  the  temperature  at 

the NP surface, is given by the simple equation  

.   (7) 

For  small  NPs,  the  total  rate  of  heat  dissipation 

  depends  on  the  induced  electric  field 

inside an Au-NP and is given by the analytic equation 

,      (8) 

where 

 and 

 are the dielectric constants of gold and water, respectively; 

 is the 

NP volume. The dissipation given by Eq. 8 depends on the electric field amplitude  that is a 

function of the light intensity, 

.  For large NPs, the near-field equation (8) is no 

longer  valid,  and  we  need  to  use  the  standard  Mie  theory.36  Figure  3  shows  the  numerical 

results  for  a  single  NP  in  water.  We  used  COMSOL  to  obtain  the  electromagnetic  and 

thermal properties. In particular, we see that 

for small NP sizes (

), 

as  shown  in  Figure  3d.  Here 

  denotes  the  NP  diameter  and,  correspondingly, 

 
 

 
 
13 

max,max,14()104totNPNPtwtotNPtwNPQRTrRkrrTQTRrkRrNPR,twk,Au,ttwkkmax,14tottwNPQTkRtotQ220003Im()82totNPAuAuQVEr()Au0NPV200008IcE2max()NPNPTaaNPaNPa. This limit is consistent with Eqs. 7 and 8.  For larger NPs, the electromagnetic 

retardation  effects  become  strong  and  the  dependence 

  becomes  more  complex.  

In  particular,  the  absorption  cross  section  is  not  proportional  to  the  NP  volume  anymore 

(Figure 3d).  

 

 

Figure  3:    Computer  simulations  of  the  electromagnetic  and  thermal  properties  of  a  single 

NP heater. (a) Model of a single Au-NP in a thermally-conductive matrix. (b,c) Absorption 

cross sections and spatial temperature distributions for single Au-NPs. (d) Temperature at the 

surface of a single NP as a function of the NP diameter. Inset: Temperature map for a 10nm-

NP in water.  

 

 
 

 
 
14 

/2NPNPRamax()NPTaThen, for a single NP heater, the localization length is given apparently by 

 and 

the  maximum  temperature  gradient  occurs  near  the  NP  surface  in  the  matrix  at 

.  

This  gradient is  given by

.   Then, the  figures of  merit  for the  CW-regime 

become:  

. 

Note  that  the  second  parameter 

  has  the  size  dependence.  For  small  NPs, 

 For larger NPs, we can create stronger temperature variations since the 

temperature generation grows with the size as 

. Since the above figures of merit 

belong  to  the  simplest  heating  system,  these  figures  can  be  used  as  references  for  more 

complex nanoscale heaters. Now we look at the power parameters of merit for a single NP:  

 

where 

is  the  absorption  cross  section  of  a  NP.  These  parameters  have  units 

and should be calculated numerically for a single NP and for NP complexes. For a single NP 

of small size, these parameters have simple analytical expressions and strongly depend on the 

size:  

 
 

 
 
15 

2NPaNPrRmaxmax()NPdTTdxRrmaxmaxfluxflu x 2,().localizationlengthtemperaturegradientheatingheaterNPLLdTTdlIRIr temperaturegradient .temperaturegradstaticPientNR2maxNPTRmax,max,,1,411,4temperaturefluxtemperatureabsorptionabsfluxtwNPabsorptiontottwNPTcEffIkRTEffQkR/abstotfluxcQI 

In  the  pulsed  regime,  the  general  solution  for  a  small  NP  is  more  complex  and, 

therefore, we consider below two temporal regimes.   

Pulsed excitation, short times. For short times, the temperature distribution 

 

is given by a special function.26 However, we can make the following approximations for the 

localization length: (1) The heat diffusion distance from the NP surface can be estimated by 

the diffusion length, 

, where 

is time; (2) Then, the size of the hot spot can 

be  approximated  as 

.  Therefore,  the  dynamic  figures  of  merit 

get the following approximations:  

 

We note that the above dynamic parameter did not become infinite at very small times since 

all these equations are valid for 

. We see that the pulsed regime has obviously an 

advantage for short times when the localization is strong (small parameters 

) and 

the temperature gradients are at maximum (large parameters 

). In other words, 

the  dynamic  localization  parameter  is  smaller  than  the  corresponding  static  one  for  short 

times: 

. This is because of the finite time for heat to diffuse 

from  a  NP.  The  same  argument 

is  applied  for 

the 

thermal-gradient  parameter, 

 
 

 
 
16 

2,1.temperaturefluxtemperatureabsorptNPionNPEffREffR(,)Ttr,w()diffLtKtt()~2()heatingheaterLtLLt,maxmaxfluxflu x, ~1()()1~localizationlengthtempdiffwheatingdynamicheaterNPdynameratureicdiffgraientwdKtLLRdTrTtdlIIKtpulsett localizationldyenngcthami temperaturegrdaynamicdient  2dynamiclocalizationlengthlocalizationlengthstatic.  The  pulsed  regime  is  able  to  produce  stronger  temperature 

gradients.   

Pulsed excitation, long times.   For long times, when the heated spot becomes large, 

we can view the NP as a delta-functional heater. The corresponding condition for the time is 

.  For  NPs  with  diameters  of  10nm  and  100nm,  the  times  should  be 

  and 

,  respectively.  Now  we  look  at  the  short-pulse  regime  assuming 

 where the total absorbed  energy is 

 and 

.  

The solution for Eq. 1 is well-known26:   

.  

Then localization length  obviously depends on time, 

.  And the 

time-dependent figures of merit are   

 

We see that, for long times, the figures of merit for the localization, 

, increases 

that  manifests  an  increase  of  the  localization  region.  Simultaneously,  the  thermal-gradient 

parameter, 

, decreases for the same reason of spreading of the heated spot due 

to diffusion. In other words, as expected, the temperature distribution at long times becomes 

 
 

 
 
17 

  dynamictemperaturegradienttemperaturegradienstcttai2,/NPdiffwtRK2nst200nst(,)()(),totQtPtrrtotfluxpulseeIt0pulset2,34,1(,)2diffwrKttotwwdiffweTtecKtr,2(2)heatingdifwLLnKt , max2,(2),().diffwheatingdynamicheaterNPlocalizationlengthtemperaturegradiendynamicfluxdifftwLnKtLLRdTconstdxIKtr localizationldyenngcthami temperaturegrdaynamicdientless  localized  and,  simultaneously,  the  temperature  gradients  decrease  with  time  and 

eventually disappear for 

.  

To conclude, compared to the CW-regime, the pulse excitation creates overall a more 

strongly-localized  temperature  distributions  at  short  times  since  the  temperature  increase 

drops  exponentially  as  a  function  of  the  radial  coordinate.  However,  the  degree  of 

localization at long times becomes strongly reduced because of spreading of the heated spot.  

 

4.  The NP-NP-NP assembly with a hot spot for localized heating 

Figures 1b and 4 show the geometry with three spherical NPs.  The simple idea behind this 

structure was already pointed out in our old paper,16 but it was not investigated at that time in 

details.  The  idea  is  to  use  two  large  NPs  as  a  nano-optical  antenna  to  enhance  the 

electromagnetic field and heating at the small heater NP. The sizes of larger antenna NPs are 

chosen  as  100nm,  whereas  the  small  spherical  heater  has  a  smaller  dimeter  of  10nm.    The 

NP-NP antenna with the chosen sizes is able to strongly enhance the electromagnetic field in 

the  center  (Figure  5).  Regarding  the  temperature  generation,  the  challenge  here  is  the 

expected strong dissipation rate in the large 100nm-NPs. This dissipation can create a strong 

temperature increase at the surfaces of large NPs and it also can limit the power efficiencies 

of  temperature  generation  at  the  small  10nm-NP.  If  such,  the  hot-spot  generation  of 

temperature in the small NP would become a secondary effect. Indeed our calculations show 

different  regimes  of  temperature  generation  that  depend  strongly  on  the  sizes  of  large  NPs 

and on the distances in a trimer.  Below we discuss these regimes in detail.  

 

 
 

 
 
18 

t 

Figure 4: Computer simulations of the electromagnetic properties of the NP-NP-NP trimer. 
Insets:    Model  of  the  trimer  system  and  the  plot  for  the  resonant  absorption  region  of  the 
10nm-NP.   

 

 

 
 

 
 
19 

 

Figure  5:  Electromagnetic  properties  of  the  NP-NP  antennas  without  the  central  NP.  (a) 

Field  enhancement  factor  in  the  center  of  the  dimer  for  the  three  wavelengths  used  in  the 

temperature  calculations.  (b)  Spatial  map  of  the  field  enhancement  factor  with  the 

electromagnetic hot spot in the center of the NP-NP antenna with gap=30nm.  Inset: Model 

and geometry.  

 

First  of  all,  we  look  at  the  heat  powers  generated  by  the  whole  complex  and  by  the 

small 10nm-NP inside the complex (Figure 4).  We see that the heat generation by the small 

10nm-NP  heater  has  the  resonances  at  530nm  and  610nm.  At  these  resonances,  we  now 

compute the temperature distributions inside the complex (Figures 6 and 7). And we observe 

rather interesting patterns of the temperature distribution that can be understood qualitatively. 

In particular, the system can exhibit a temperature spike at the small NP for some geometrical 

parameters. The spike temperature, 

, is defined in  Figure 6c.  According to Figure 3d, 

an  isolated  small  10nm-NP  generates  a  lower  temperature  increase  compared  to  any  other 

 
 

 
 
20 

peakTsingle large NP in our complexes. The simple dependence for the generation of temperature 

for  small  NPs  is: 

.16,17  Then,  the  small  10nm-NP  in  the  trimer  generates  the 

following temperature spike in the middle of the system  

,    (9) 

where 

 is the field enhancement factor in the center of the antenna NP-NP 

complex. The position-dependent field enhancement factor 

is defined as 

.  

The field enhancement factor in the centre of the antenna NP-NP complex is plotted in Figure 

5 for the three resonance frequencies. Of course, the factor 

 decreases with the NP-NP 

gap  in  the  antenna  NP-NP  dimer  (Figure  5).  We  note  that  the  above  factor 

  was 

computed  for  the  dimer  NP-NP  structure  to  reveal  the  strength  of  enhancement.  Therefore, 

the  enhancement  effect  for  the  temperature  spike  in  the  middle  of  the  nano-heater  system 

should diminish and then should vanish for large gaps, 

. Indeed, we observe this behaviour 

for the gaps 

 (Figure 7a). For the most interesting case of small gaps (

), 

the  temperature  distribution  (Figure  7a)  is  special,  exhibiting  the  temperature  spike  in  the 

middle.  This behaviour can be understood in the following way: The two large 100nm-NPs 

create  a  large  temperature  increase  of  about  5K  at  their  surfaces  since  we  deal  with  large 

plasmonic  NPs. Then, the  small 10nm-heater in  the  middle can noticeably  contribute to  the 

temperature  distribution  only  if  the  NP-NP  antenna  creates  strong  plasmonic  field 

enhancement (see Eq. 9).  Without the antenna effect, a single 10nm-NP cannot create a large 

temperature  increase  for  the  given  light  intensity  simply  because  this  heater  NP  is  small  in 

size.  In addition,  the temperature is almost  constant  inside the large 100nm-NPs because of 

 
 

 
 
21 

2maxNPTR2peakNPNPNPfluxTRPI(0)NPNPPPr()Pr*20()PrEEENPNPPNPNPPd50nmd~30nmdthe  very  high  thermal  conductivity  of  gold.  Then,  the  resulting  temperature  profile  for  the 

small  gaps  (

)  has  a  spike  in  the  centre  and  two  flat  regions  on  the  sides.  For  the 

gaps 

, the central spike almost vanishes since the small 10nm-NP cannot generate 

much heat without a strong antenna effect (Figure 7a). In Figure 7, we summarize the data for 

the  NP-NP-NP  trimer  with  the  antenna  effect.  Overall,  we  found  that  the  temperature 

distributions depend critically on the sizes of the larger NPs (antenna NPs) and on the size of 

the central NP-heater. The temperature focusing effect is non-trivial since the antenna itself, 

which is made of large NPs, is an efficient generator of photo-heat.  

 

 

 

Figure  6:  Computer  simulations  of  the  field  and  temperature  distributions  in  the  optically-

excited  trimer  with  gap=30nm.  (a,b)  Electromagnetic  and  temperature  maps.  (c,d)  the 

temperature distributions along the two axes.  Inset:  Model.   

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
22 

~30nmd50nmd 

 

 

Figure  7:  (a)  Computer  simulations  of  the  temperature  distributions  in  optically-excited 
trimers with different gaps, d=30, 60, 100 and 200nm. (b) Characteristic temperatures in the 
thermal hot-spot region of the trimer.  Insets:  Models.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
23 

 

Figure 8: (a, b) Spatial figures of merit for the NP-NP-NP trimer.  Insets:  Models.   

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
24 

 

Figure 9: (a, b) Power figures of merit for the NP-NP-NP trimer.  Inset:  Model.   

 

 

Figures  8  shows  the  spatial  figures  of  merit  at  the  resonance  wavelengths  of  single 

NPs and NP-NP-NP trimers. We look now at the figure of merit for the localization length. 

The general principle is that heater systems with smaller 

 have advantage since 

the temperature distribution in such systems is more localized. For small and large spherical 

NPs, 

.  For  the  NP-NP-NP  trimers,  we  see  that  the  localization  figure  of 

merit, 

, is slightly smaller than that for single NPs (Figure 8a) and, therefore, the 

trimer  is  slightly  better  for  localization  of  temperature.  Overall,  we  see  that  the  trimer 

 
 

 
 
25 

 localizationlength 2localizationlength localizationlengthstructure  does  not  give  a  real  advantage  for  localization  of  temperature  as  compared  to  a 

single NP. Then, we look at the temperature-gradient parameter (Figure 8b). We see in Figure 

8b  that  the  parameter  of  temperature  gradient  (

)  for  the  small  trimers 

significantly exceeds the corresponding parameters for the small and large single NPs. This is 

due to the strong temperature gradients in the central region of the trimer between the 10nm-

NP and the 100nm-NPs. We see that the tightly-packed trimers have advantage as compared 

to  single NPs. The physical  reason is in  the electromagnetic  focusing of optical  energy into 

the hot spot region of the NP-NP antenna where we place the small 10nm-heater.      

 

 In Figure 9,  we show the situation  with the power  figures of  merit. The  NP-NP-NP 

trimer  performs  much  better  than  the  single  NP  heaters  for  the  power  parameter 

. This is due to the focusing of optical energy on the small NP. However, the 

NP-NP-NP  trimer  cannot  compete  with  a  single  small-NP  heater  for  the  parameter 

.  The  reason  is,  as  we  mentioned  above,  strong  absorption  by  the  NP-NP 

antenna.  In other  words, the NP-NP-NP trimer  gives  great  advantage  for  a  given light  flux, 

but, simultaneously, the trimer consumes lots of energy and it cannot compete with a single 

small NP. In the next section, we will show how we can overcome this disadvantage of strong 

dissipation in the large antenna NPs using the Fano interference effects.  

 

5.  The Fano heater assembled from two spherical NPs and a nanorod 

The Fano effect in optics and plasmonics appears when an electronic excitation with a narrow 

absorption line interacts with another broad resonance.24,37,38  In our model, we now include a 

nanorod  (NR)  with  a  strong  and  narrow  plasmon  resonance  and  a  NP  dimer  with  broad 

 
 

 
 
26 

 temperaturegradienttemperaturefluxEfftemperatureabsorptionEffresonances (Figure 10). The resulting NP-NR-NP trimer exhibits the Fano effect seen as a dip 

in  the  extinction  spectra  (Figure  10).  The  striking  feature  of  the  Fano  effect  is  that  the 

extinction of the complex (NP-NR-NP) is not a simple sum of the extinctions of the isolated 

components (NR and NP-NP antenna). We illustrate this feature in Supporting Information. 

The  appearance  of  the  Fano  effect  in  the  extinction  spectrum  of  our  complex  is  expected 

since,  in  our  system,  the  narrow  plasmon  line  of  the  NR  should  strongly  interact  with  the 

broad  plasmonic  band  of  the  NP-NP-antenna.  Then,  we  look  at  the  absorptions  of  the 

components (Figure 10b). Importantly, the dip in the absorption cross section of the antenna 

NPs  coincides  with  the  maximum  of  the  absorption  by  the  central  NR  (Figure  10b).  The 

central NR plays the role of a heater and it receives much optical energy in our structure. This 

behavior appears at the wavelength of 650nm. Another, obvious advantage of the NR heater 

is the narrow plasmonic peak.  

 

We  now  consider  the  ability  of  this  cluster  to  generate  high  photo-temperature 

(Figures  11,  12  and  13).    First,  we  observe  a  very  strong  effect  of  electromagnetic 

enhancement  for  the  local  temperature  at  the  NR  for  the  trimer  system  (Figure  11).  This 

effect  comes  from  the  electromagnetic  hot  spot  in  the  NP-NP  antenna  and  from  the  narrow 

plasmon resonance of the small NR. Simultaneously, we observe the interference Fano effect 

that slightly suppresses light dissipation in the NP-NP antenna dimer at 650nm (Figure 10b). 

These  absorption  properties  affect  the  magnitude  of  the  local  temperature  increase  near  the 

center of the NP-NR-NP structure (Figures 11 and 12).    

 

The  effect  of  the  temperature  generation  at  the  NR  in  the  NP-NR-NP  complex  is 

remarkably 

strong.  We 

see 

that 

the  enhancement 

factor 

for 

temperature 

is   

.  This is due to  the electromagnetic hot  spot  effect  in  the 

NP-NP  antenna.  We  then  determine  the  field  enhancement  factor  of  the  hot  spot  for  our 

 
 

 
 
27 

max,max,/~20TNPNRNPNRPTTconditions (650nm and gap=40nm) that is 

 (Figure 5). This number is larger than 

the  calculated  temperature  enhancement 

.    This  is  expected  since  the  NR  is  located 

closely  to  the  large  100nm-NPs,  which  have  lower  temperatures,  and,  therefore,  the  system 

should  have  strong  heat  currents  from  the  hot  NR  to  the  colder  100nm-NPs.    This  should 

lower to some degree the temperature of the hot NR.    

 

We now discuss the figures of merit for the Fano heater. Figures 12b and c show the 

data.  First,  the  degree  of  localization  of  temperature  is  greatly  enhanced  in  the  NP-NR-NP 

complex  (Fig.  12b),  i.e.  the  localization  parameter 

for  this  system  gets  very 

small. This tells us that the degree of localization of temperature is very strong. Second, the 

temperature-gradient  parameter  (

)  for  the  Fano  NP-NR-NP  complex  greatly 

exceeds the corresponding parameters for the NR and NP-NP systems. We see that the Fano 

heater has clear advantage. Now we look at  the power figures of merit shown in  Figure 13.  

The power figure of merit responsible for the amplitude of photo-temperature,

, 

becomes strongly enhanced in the case of NP-NR-NP system (Figure 13a). We see that this 

figure of merit of the NP-NR-NP system (Figure 13a) is much larger than those for a single 

NR,  NP-NP  dimer  and  NP-NP-NP  trimer.  Also,  we  see  that  the  NP-NR-NP  system  has  a 

relatively  large  absorption  figure  of  merit, 

(Figure  13b)  despite  the  large 

absorption  rate  of  the  antenna  100nm-NPs.  Then,  the  parameters 

for  the 

single NR system and for the NP-NR-NP complexes are comparable (Figure 13b). We note 

that, in the previous case of the NP-NP-NP system, the absorption parameter for the NP-NP-

NP is much smaller than the corresponding parameter for the single small NP (Figure  13c).  

In the NP-NR-NP system, the absorption parameter, 

, is strongly increased 

 
 

 
 
28 

~55NPNPP~20TPlocalizationlength temperaturegradienttemperaturefluxEfftemperatureabsorptionEfftemperatureabsorptionEfftemperatureabsorptionEffdue to the narrow plasmonic resonance of NR. In other words, the narrow plasmon resonance 

of the NR leads to strong localized absorption by the NR at 650nm and, simultaneously, the 

NP-NP antenna does not exhibit strong absorption at this wavelength. In addition, we see that 

overall the Fano complex has larger field-enhancement factors (Figure 11) as compared to the 

case of the NP trimer (Figure 6a). Interestingly, this regime of localized photo-heating in the 

NP-NR-NP  complex  appears  simultaneously  with  the  Fano  effect  when  the  narrow  NR 

resonance strongly interacts with the broad plasmonic band of the 100nm-NPs. To illustrate 

these interesting behaviors in terms of the figures of merit, we summarize the results for the 

NP-NR-NP and NP-NP-NP complexes in Figure 13.  

Figure 10: Computer simulations of the electromagnetic properties of the NP-NR-NP trimer.  

(a) Optical cross sections of the NP-NR-NP complex. (b)  Absorption cross sections for the 

elements within the NP-NR-NP complex.  The sum of the absorption cross sections of the NR 

and the NP-NP antenna gives the total absorption.  Inset:  Model.   

 
 

 
 
29 

 

Figure 11: Spatial z-x maps of the photothermal properties for the three systems: NR, NP-NP 
and NP-NR-NP. Insets:  Models.   

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
30 

 

Figure  12:  (a)  Computer  simulations  of  the  local  temperatures  for  the  three  systems  under 

study:   NR, NP-NP and NP-NR-NP.   (b,  c) Spatial  figures of  merit  calculated  for the Fano 

heater and related structures. Insets:  Models. 

 

 
 

 
 
31 

 

Figure 13:  Power figures of merit for the NP-NR-NP trimer and for the previous NP-NP-NP 

complex.  We  see  that  the  Fano  complex  has  clearly  an  advantage  over  the  NP-NP-NP 

structure.  

 

6.  Solvent-dependent photo-temperature  

 

We  note  in  this  short  section  that  the  photo-generated  increase  of  temperature  and  some  of 

the  figures  of  merit  strongly  depend  on  the  matrix  material.  The  above  calculations  were 

performed  for  water  which  is  a  very  common  matrix.  However,  experiments  can  be  also 

carried out in organic solvents, which have typically lower heat conductivity. We give a few 

examples  of  thermal  conductivities  of  the  common  solvents  as  Table  S1  in  Supporting 

Information.  The  advantage  of  organic  solvents  is  that  they  will  create  stronger  thermal 

isolation.  Therefore,  an  optically-excited  plasmonic  system  with  an  organic  solvent  can 

generate higher photo-temperatures. The simple scaling law for the maximum temperature in 

the CW-regime is  

 
 

 
 
32 

.    

(10)  

We  can  see  it  easily  for  the  case  of  a  single  NP  (7).  For  a  complex  plasmonic  system,  the 

scaling law (10) is valid if  

. This condition is well satisfied for our plasmonic 

systems. Therefore, the local temperature distribution in a plasmonic system with an arbitrary 

matrix  can  be  calculated  from  the  above  numerical  results  simply  by  multiplying  by  the 

scaling ratio

.  For the common organic solvents given in Table S1, the maximum 

temperature  in  a  system  and  the  three  figures  of  merit  (

and 

) will be increased by the factors 

.  Simultaneously, the 

first figure of merit, 

, will not be strongly affected by the matrix.  

 

7.  Conclusions 

 

We have investigated the possibility to create thermal hot spots by using electromagnetic hot 

spots in plasmonic nanostructures. For this, we place a small heater nanocrystal between two 

large  antenna  NPs.  The  formation  of  the  thermal  hot  spots  occurs  under  the  peculiar 

conditions.  In  particular,  the  thermal  hot  spots  appear  in  the  trimer  NP  complex  with  small 

gaps  in  the  NP-NP  antenna  due  to  the  strong  electromagnetic  focusing.  Another  interesting 

possibility to  form the thermal hot  spots is the use of small nanorods as heater elements. In 

this case, we propose the NP-NR-NP complex operating in the regime of the plasmonic Fano 

effect. This Fano complex demonstrates strongly-enhanced figures of merit for localization of 

temperature.  

 
 

 
 
33 

max,1tmatrixTk,,tmatrixtAukk,,/twtmatrixkk,temperaturegradienttemperaturefluxEfftemperatureabsorptionEff,,/~36twtmatrixkk localizationlength 

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was funded by U.S. Army Research Office under Grant W911NF-12-1-0407, by 

Volkswagen Foundation (Germany) and via Chang Jiang Chair Professorship (China). L.K.K. 

was supported by the CMSS Fellowship Award at Ohio University.  

Supporting Information  

 

 

 

Figure S1: Calculated extinction cross sections for the three systems:  NR, NP-NP and NP-

NR-NP.  

 
 

 
 
34 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure S2: Comparison between the extinction cross section of the NP-NR-NP complex and 

the sum of the extinctions of the two isolated plasmonic  systems (NR and NP-NP). We  see 

the following: (1) The appearance of the Fano dip in the case of the NP-NR-NP complex; (2) 

The extinctions of the components are not additive, 

.  

 

Table S1: Thermal conductivities of a few common solvents [S1].  

 

solvent 

water 

methanol 

ethanol   

acetone 

tetrachloromethane 

kt (W/mK) 

0.598 

0.200 

0.169 

0.161 

0.099 

 
 

 
 
35 

NPNRNPNRNPNP[S1]  Bialkowski,  S.E.  Photothermal  spectroscopy  methods  for  chemical  analysis,  Volume 
134  in  Chemical  Analysis:  A  Series  of  Monographs  on  Analytical  Chemistry  and  Its 
Applications, J. D. Winefordner, Series Editor; John Wiley & Sons: Chichester, 1996.  

 

 

References  

                                                           
 

1  Cognet,  L.;  Tardin,  C.;  Boyer,  D.;  Choquet,  D.;  Tamarat,  P.;  Lounis,  B.  Single  Metallic 
Nanoparticle Imaging for Protein Detection in Cells. PNAS 2003, 100, 11350–11355.   
 
2  Gobin,  A.  M.;  O'Neal,  D.P.;  Watkins,  D.M.;  Halas,  N.J.;  Drezek,  R.A.;  West,  J.L.  Near 
Infrared  Laser-Tissue  Welding  Using  Nanoshells  as  an  Exogenous  Absorber.  Lasers  Surg. 
Med. 2005, 37, 123-129. 
 
3 Skirtach, A.G.; Dejugnat, C.; Braun, D.; Susha, A.S.; Rogach, A.L.; Parak, W.J.; Mohwald, 
H.; Sukhorukov, G.B. The Role of Metal Nanoparticles in  Remote Release of Encapsulated 
Materials. Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 1371-1377. 
 
4 Jain, P. K.; El-Sayed, I. H.; El-Sayed, M. A. Au Nanoparticles Target Cancer. Nano Today 
2007, 2, 18–29.  

5  Li,  M.;  Lohmüller,  T.;  Feldmann,  J.  Optical  Injection  of  Gold  Nanoparticles  into  Living 
Cells. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 770-775.  

6 Qiu, J.; Wei, W. D. Surface Plasmon-Mediated Photothermal Chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2014, 118, 20735–20749.  
 
7  Linic,  S.;  Christopher,  P.;  Ingram,  D.  B.  Plasmonic-Metal  Nanostructures  for  Efficient 
Conversion of Solar to Chemical Energy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 10, 911−921. 

8  Assanov,  G.  S.;  Zhanabaev,  Z.  Zh.;  Govorov,  A.  O.;  Neiman,  A.  B.  Modelling  of  Photo-
Thermal  Control of Biological  Cellular Oscillators.  Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics  2013, 222, 
2697–2704. 

9  Richardson,  H.  H.;  Carlson,  M.  T.;  Tandler,  P.  J.;  Hernandez,  P.;  Govorov,  A.  O. 
Experimental  and  Theoretical  Studies  of  Light-to-Heat  Conversion  and  Collective  Heating 
Effects in Metal Nanoparticle Solutions. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 1139-1146. 
 
10 Boriskina, S. V.; Ghasemi, H.; Chen, G. Plasmonic Materials for Energy: From Physics to 
Applications. Mater. Today 2013, 16, 375−386. 

 
 

 
 
36 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 

 
11  Hühn,  D.;  Govorov,  A.  O.;  Gil,  P.  R.;  Parak,  W.  J.  Photostimulated  Au  Nanoheaters  in 
Polymer and Biological Media: Characterization of Mechanical Destruction and Boiling. Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2012, 22, 294–303.   
 
12  Fang,  Z.;  Zhen,  Y.-R.;  Neumann,  O.;  Polman,  A.;  Garcia  deAbajo,  F.  J.;  Nordlander,  P.; 
Halas, N. J. Evolution of Light-Induced Vapor Generation at a Liquid-Immersed Metallic 
Nanoparticle. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 1736–1742.  
 

13  Baral,  S.;  Green,  A.;  Livshits,  M.;  Govorov,  A.  O.;  Richardson,  H.  H.  Comparison  of 
Vapor  Formation  of  Water  at  the  Solid/Water  Interface  to  Colloidal  Solutions  Using 
Optically Excited Gold Nanostructures. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 1439-1448. 

14  Capobianco,  J.  A.;  Vetrone,  F.;  D'Alesio,  T.;  Tessari,  G.;  Speghini,  A.;  Bettinelli,  M. 
Optical  Spectroscopy  of  Nanocrystalline  Cubic  Obtained  Y2O3:  Er3+  by  Combustion 
Synthesis. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2000, 2, 3203-3207.  
 
15 Hartland, G. V. Optical Studies of Dynamics in Noble Metal Nanostructures.  Chem. Rev. 
2011, 111, 3858−3887. 
 
16  Govorov,  A.  O.;  Zhang,  W.;  Skeini,  T.;  Richardson,  H.  H.;  Lee,  J.;  Kotov,  N.  A.  Gold 
Nanoparticle  Ensembles  as  Heaters  and  Actuators:  Melting  and  Collective  Plasmon 
Resonances. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2006, 1, 84-90. 
 
17  Keblinski,  P.;  Cahill,  D.G.;  Bodapati,  A.;  Sullivan C.R.;  Taton,  T.A.  Limits  of  localized 
heating by electromagnetically excited nanoparticles.  J. Appl. Phys. 2006, 100, 054305.   

18 Govorov, A. O.; Richardson, H. H. Generating Heat with Metal Nanoparticles. Nano Today 
2007, 2, 30–38. 
 
19 Govorov, A. O.; Fan, Z.; Neiman, A. B. Photo-Thermal Effect of Plasmonic Nanoparticles 
and  Related  Bio-Applications.  Book  chapter  in  "Complex-Shaped  Metal  Nanoparticles. 
Bottom-Up Syntheses and Applications" (eds. Sau, T. K.; Rogach, A. L.); Wiley-VCH Verlag 
GmbH: Weinheim, Germany, 2012.  
 
20  Baffou,  G.;  Quidant,  R.;  Girard,  C.  Heat  Generation  in  Plasmonic  Nanostructures: 
Influence of Morphology. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 153109-3. 

21 Toroghi, S.; Kik, P. G.  Photothermal  Response Enhancement in Heterogeneous Plasmon-
Resonant Nanoparticle Trimers. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 205414-6. 
 
22  Toroghi,  S.;  Lumdee,  C.;  Kik,  P.  G.  Heterogeneous  Plasmonic  Trimers  for  Enhanced 
Nonlinear Optical Absorption. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106, 103102-4.   

 
 

 
 
37 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 

23  Liu,  Z.;  Li,  Q.;  Zhang,  W.;  Yang,  Y.;  Qiu,  M.  Nanoscale  Control  of  Temperature 
Distribution Using a Plasmonic Trimer. Plasmonics 2015, 10, 911-918.  

24  Baldwin,  C.  L.;  Bigelow,  N.  W.;  Masiello,  D.  J.  Thermal  Signatures  of  Plasmonic  Fano 
Interferences:  Toward  the  Achievement  of  Nanolocalized  Temperature  Manipulation.  J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5, 1347–1354.  
 

25  Lalisse,  A.;  Tessier,  G.;  Plain,  J.;  Baffou,  G.  Quantifying  the  Efficiency  of  Plasmonic 
Materials for Near-Field Enhancement and Photothermal Conversion. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015 
119, 25518-25528.  
 
26 Carslaw, H.S.; Jaeger, J.C. Conduction of Heat in Solids; Oxford University Press: London, 
1993.   
 
27 Jack, C.; Karimullah, A. S.; Tullius, R.; Khosravi Khorashad, L.; Rodier, M.; Fitzpatrick, 
B.;  Barron,  L.  D.;  Gadegaard,  N.;  Lapthorn,  A.;  Rotello,  V.  M.;  et  al.  Spatial  Control  of 
Chemical  Processes  on  Nanostructures  through  Nano-Localised  Water  Heating.  Nat. 
Commun. 2016, 7, 10946.   
 
28  Coppens,  Z.  J.;  Li,  W.;  Walker,  D.  G.;  Valentine,  J.  G.  Probing  and  Controlling 
Photothermal Heat Generation in Plasmonic Nanostructures. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 1023-1028.   
  
29 Guler, U.; Ndukaife, J. C.; Naik, G. V.; Agwu Nnanna, A. G.; Kildishev, A. V.; Shalaev, 
V.  M.;  Boltasseva,  A.  Local  Heating  with  Lithographically  Fabricated  Plasmonic  Titanium 
Nitride Nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 6078−6083. 
 
30  Rothemund,  P.  W.  K.;  Folding  DNA  to  Create  Nanoscale  Shapes  and  Patterns.  Nature 
2006, 440, 297–302. 
 
31  Roller,  E.-M.;  Khosravi  Khorashad,  L.;  Fedoruk,  M.;  Schreiber,  R.;  Feldmann,  J.; 
Govorov,  A.  O.;  Liedl,  T.  DNA-Assembled  Nanoparticle  Rings  Exhibit  Electric  and 
Magnetic Resonances at Visible Frequencies. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1368–1373.   
 
32 Kuzyk, A.; Schreiber, R.; Zhang, H.; Govorov, A. O.; Liedl, T.; Liu, N. Reconfigurable 3D 
Plasmonic Metamolecules. Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, 862-866.  

33  Acuna,  G.  P.;  Bucher,  M.;  Stein,  I.  H.;  Steinhauer,  C.;  Kuzyk,  A.;  Holzmeister,  P.; 
Schreiber,  R.;  Moroz,  A.;  Stefani,  F.  D.;  Liedl,  T.;  et  al.  Distance  Dependence  of  Single-
Fluorophore Quenching  by  Gold  Nanoparticles Studied on DNA Origami.  ACS Nano 2012, 
6, 3189–3195. 
 

 
 

 
 
38 

                                                                                                                                                                                     
 

34 Schreiber, R.; Luong, N.; Fan, Z.; Kuzyk, A.; Nickels, P.; Smith, D. M.; Yurke, B.; Kuang, 
W.;  Govorov,  A.  O.;  Liedl,  T.  Chiral  Plasmonic  DNA  Nanostructures  with  Switchable 
Circular Dichroism, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2948.  
 
35 Palik, E. D. Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids; Academic Press: New York, 1985. 
 
36  Bohren,  C.  F.;  Huffman,  D.  R.  Absorption  and  Scattering  of  Light  by  Small  Particles; 
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH: Weinheim, Germany, 1998. 
 
37 Zhang, W.; Govorov, A. O.; Bryant, G. W. Semiconductor-Metal Nanoparticle Molecules: 
Hybrid Excitons and Non-Linear Fano Effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 146804-4. 
 
38  Fan,  J.  A.;  Wu,  C.;  Bao,  K.;  Bao,  J.;  Bardhan,  R.;  Halas,  N.  J.;  Manoharan,  V.  N.; 
Nordlander,  P.;  Shvets,  G.;  Capasso,  F.  Self-Assembled  Plasmonic  Nanoparticle  Clusters. 
Science 2010, 328, 1135–1138. 
 
 

 
 

 
 
39 

