Anisotropic electronic structure and transport properties of the

H-0 hyperhoneycomb lattice

Marcos Ver´ıssimo-Alves,∗ Rodrigo G. Amorim, and A. S. Martins

Departamento de F´ısica, ICEx,

Universidade Federal Fluminense

Volta Redonda, RJ, Brazil

(Dated: May 31, 2016)

Abstract

Carbon, being one of the most versatile elements of the periodic table, forms solids and molecules

with often unusual properties. Recently, a novel family of three-dimensional graphitic carbon

structures, the so-called hyperhoneycomb lattices, has been proposed, with the possibility of being

topological insulators [1]. In this work, we present electronic structure calculations for one mem-

ber (H-0) of this family, using Density Functional Theory and non-equilibrium Green's functions

transport calculations to show that the H-0 structure should have strongly anisotropic electronic

properties, being an insulator or a conductor depending on the crystalline orientation chosen for

transport. Calculations in the framework of Extended Huckel Theory indicate that these properties

can only be understood if one considers at least 2nd nearest-neighbor interactions between carbon

atoms, invalidating some of the conclusions of Ref. [1], at least for this particular material.

∗ Corresponding author. E-mail: marcos verissimo@id.uff.br

1

1.

INTRODUCTION

Graphene is one of the promising candidate for nanoelectronics, due to its linear electronic

dispersion close to the Fermi level. This results in the so-called "massless Dirac Fermions"

that make it not only a candidate for all sorts of devices, but as a laboratory for fundamental

physics. In fact, experimental studies with graphene on fundamental physics include effects

such as the observation of anomalous integer quantum Hall Effect at room temperature [2],

and the Klein paradox [3] from quantum electrodynamics, to name just a few.

Nonetheless, materials based on carbon do appear in many allotropic forms of different

and dimensionality, where it is the sole constituent, such as buckyballs (0D) [4], carbon

nanotubes [5] and nanowires [6, 7] (1D), graphene (2D) [8] and diamond (3D) [9]. The

electronic properties of each of these allotropes, in spite of being composed only of carbon,

are completely different. Diamond, for example, is an insulator, and graphene is a zero-gap

semiconductor; carbon nanotubes, on the other hand, can be either metallic or semiconduct-

ing, merely by a geometrical factor. This, in conjunction with their mechanical properties,

confers carbon physics a great interest from the point of view of applications, with several

devices based on graphene and carbon nanotubes having been proposed in the last few years

[10].

Recently,

inspired by recent experimental realizations of a three-dimensional spin-

anisotropic harmonic honeycomb (H-n lattices) iridates [11], a family of new graphitic-like

carbon networks was proposed by Mullen et al

[1]. They study these so-called hyper-

honeycomb networks by means of a simple nearest-neighbor one-p orbital tight-binding

Hamiltonian, which predicts quantized Hall conductivities in three dimensions for magnetic

fields with toroidal geometry. Moreover, the presence of spin-orbit coupling would induce

topological surface states, offering yet another laboratory for studying the spin Hall effect,

or yet another application in devices based on the spin-torque transfer effect.

We have shown elsewhere [12] that these effects will not be present in such materials

because the Hamiltonian of Ref. [1] does not take into account the orientation of p orbitals

adequately. In this article, we perform calculations in the framework of Density Functional

Theory [13] and Extended Huckel Theory for the simplest member of the of the H-n family,

the H-0 lattice. We find that this lattice should have peculiar and interesting transport

properties other than those proposed in Ref. [1], which could be of use in devices. We also

2

show that, if these materials are to be studied within a tight-binding framework, 1st nearest-

neighbor (n.n) interactions are insufficient to adequately describe the electronic structure

and understand electronic transport properties; instead, at least 2nd n.n. interactions should

be taken into account for a proper description of the physics and chemistry in this material.

2. METHODOLOGY

2.1. Density Functional Theory calculations

Density Functional Theory [13] calculations were carried out with the SIESTA package

[14], using Troullier-Martins norm-conserving pseudopotentials [15] and the PBE exchange-

correlation functional [16]. A 900 Ry mesh cutoff was used to ensure minimal "eggbox

effect", and a 18 × 18 × 12 undisplaced Monkhorst-Pack grid [17] was used to sample the

Brillouin Zone. A smearing temperature of 8 meV was used for the integrations in reciprocal

space.

Atomic positions were fully relaxed using a conjugate-gradients algorithm, with a maxi-

mum force criterion of 0.01 eV/A. The in-plane lattice parameter, a, and the out-of-plane

to in-plane lattice parameter, c/a, were determined through Birch-Murnaghan fits [18] to

sets of calculations where the c/a ratio was determined for a given value of a ; the global

optimum value of c/a was then determined through a final Murnaghan fit using the optimum

c/a for each value of a.

2.2. Extended Huckel Theory calculations

In our Extended Huckel Theory (EHT) calculations, a double-ζ basis set was employed

to express the basis orbitals {Φ

ν} as a sum of two Slater-Type Orbitals (STO). With this

choice, in EHT the matrix elements of the Hamiltonian (H) and overlap (S) matrices can

be expressed in terms of the atomic basis set as

Hµµ = (cid:1)ΦµHΦµ(cid:2) = Eµµ

Hµν =

1
2

KEHT (Hµµ + Hν ν) Sµν

Sµν = (cid:1)ΦµΦ

ν(cid:2) = (cid:1) φ∗

µφνd3r,

3

(1)

where subscripts µ, ν refer to basis orbitals and KEHT is an additional fitting parameter

whose value is commonly set to 1.75 for molecules and 2.3 for solids [19].

In EHT, for

each atom type, the on-site energies (Es, Ep and Ed), the ζ of the Slater Orbitals, and

the first expansion coefficient c1 need to be specified. The value of the second coefficient is

then determined with the constraint of orbital normalization. The EHT band structure is

obtained by solving the generalized eigenvalue problem

H(k)Ψi(k) = Ei(k)S(k)Ψi(k),

(2)

where Ψi(k) denotes the eigenvector of the ith band, and k is the Bloch wave vector within the

first Brillouin Zone. The Hamiltonian and overlap matrices, H(k) and S(k), are calculated

through

Hi,j(k) = (cid:2)j ′,m′
Si,j(k) = (cid:2)j ′,m′

eik·(Ri0−Rj ′m′)Hi0,j ′m′

eik·(Ri0−Rj ′m′)Si0,j ′m′,

(3)

(4)

where subscripts i and j label atoms within the unit cell and m′ is the unit cell index. The

summation indices in equations 3 and 4 run over all atoms j ′ in the unit cell m′ which are

equivalent to atom j in the reference unit cell (m = 0). The real-space matrix elements

Hi0,j ′m′ and Si0,j ′m′, constructed between atom i in the reference unit cell and atom j ′ in cell

m′, are calculated through the Extended Huckel prescription, Eqs. (1).

2.3. Non-equilibrium Green's Functions transport calculations

For transport calculations, we have employed DFT combined with non-equilibrium

Green's functions (NEGF), as implemented in the Transiesta code [20].

In this imple-

mentation, which follows the proposal by Caroli et al.

[21], the device of interest is split

into three segments, namely a scattering region and two semi-infinite electrodes to the left

and right of the scattering region. The electrode regions are pristine bulk regions of the

material, and for consistency, the charge density of the scattering and electrode regions were

matched.

Since all transport calculations occur in the z cartesian direction, we used an orthorhom-

bic cell containing eight atoms and cell vectors coinciding with cartesian axes. Transport

4

calculations along different directions thus involve different orientations of the unit cell, and

bulk and scattering regions were oriented accordingly. Translational invariance is assumed

along the x and y cartesian axes.

Using localized basis sets, it is possible to write the retarded Green's functions for the

scattering region as

G (E, V ) = [E × SS − HS [ρ] − ΣL (E, V ) − ΣR (E, V )]−1 ,

(5)

where the overlap (SS) and Hamiltonian (HS) matrices are now calculated for the scattering

region only. The semi-infinite leads are accounted for by means of the self-energies ΣL/R,

for left (L) and right (R) leads. For the system under consideration, the charge density

is calculated self-consistently via Green's functions with an initial guess coming from DFT

calculations. After convergence has been reached, the transmittance can be calculated as

T (E) = T r(cid:3)ΓL (E, V ) G (E, V ) ΓR (E, V ) G† (E, V )(cid:4) ,

(6)

where the coupling matrices are given by Γ

α = i(cid:3)Σ

α − Σ†

α(cid:4), with α ≡ {L, R}. The transmit-

tance can be interpreted as the probability of an incoming electron with energy E entering

the scattering region from the left electrode and reaching the right electrode. The current

density between two sites M and N is obtained with the Keldysh formalism and is given by

i (E)N →M = 4

e

h (cid:2)

n ∈ N

ℑ(cid:3)(cid:5)G (E) ΓLG† (E)(cid:6)mn Hnm(cid:4) ,

(7)

m ∈ M

where the sum is performed over all localized atomic orbitals n and m of the basis set, which

are associated with sites N and M , respectively. This quantity is called the "local current",

and for zero bias calculation it is the projection of the transmittance between two given

sites. For more details regarding the theory of electronic transport, we refer to the literature

[22].

3. RESULTS

3.1. Geometry and band structure

The unit cell of the H-0 lattice has four atoms, and belongs to the I41/amd space group.

The unit cell, shown in Figure 1, has ideal lattice vectors (cid:6)a1 = (1, 0, 0), (cid:6)a2 = (0, 1, 0) and

5

(cid:6)a3 = (−0.5, 0.5, 1.732), in units of a = 2.442 A, the cell parameter for graphene from our

DFT calculations. In our setup, the basal plane is parallel to the cartesian xy plane.The

H-0 structure is formed by sets of zigzag chains, one being formed by atom pair 1 − 2 and

the other by atom pair 3 − 4. In our setup, the chain formed by atoms 1 − 2 is parallel to

the xz plane, while the chain formed by atoms 3 − 4 is parallel to the yz plane. These two

sets of chains are rotated by 90◦ relative to one another, and are connected by a bond lying

along the direction perpendicular to the basal plane of the unit cell.

FIG. 1. The unit cell for the hyperhoneycomb H-0 structure. Atoms have the same numbering as in

Ref. [1]. Atoms 1 and 2 form a zigzag chain parallel to the xz plane and atoms 3 and 4 form a zigzag

chain parallel to the yz plane. Due to periodic boundary conditions, atoms 1 and 4 are nearest

neighbors. Intra-chain bonds, due to sp2-like hybridization, have both a σ component parallel to

the chain and a π component due to unhybridized, out-of-plane (⊥) p orbitals perpendicular to

the chains.

Relaxation of atomic geometry at the ideal graphene lattice parameter (agraphene

0

= 2.44

A) reveals two different bond lengths: a shorter bond length, for C-C bonds within a given

zigzag chain, and a longer one, for C-C bonds which connect chains along the direction

perpendicular to the unit cell's basal plane. In the remainder of the text, we shall call the

former kind of bond intra-chain bond, and the latter, inter-chain bond.

6

After full geometry optimization, we find that the optimized unit cell and atomic ge-

ometries differ significantly from their ideal values. The lattice parameter is now a = 2.553

A, and the lattice vectors are (cid:6)a1 = (1, 0, 0), (cid:6)a2 = (0, 1, 0) and (cid:6)a3 = (−0.5, 0.5, 1.705), in
C−C = 1.445 A and
units of a. The optimized intra- and inter-chain C-C bond lengths are aintra
C−C = 1.499 A respectively, and the angle between three consecutive atoms in a zigzag
ainter
chain is θintra = 124.1◦, indicating a deviation from ideal sp2 hybridization.

The rationale for different intra-chain and inter-chain bond lengths can be established as

follows. We first note that, in a tight-binding picture with 2s and 2p orbitals included, for

a given C atom two of the p orbitals will be linearly combined with the atom's s-orbital to

form three sp2 hybrids. These hybrids, contained in the same plane and forming 120◦ with

each other, will form strong σ-bonds with other sp2 orbitals from neighboring C atoms and

in graphene they form the well-known honeycomb lattice. The remaining, non-hybridized

p orbital will be oriented perpendicular to the plane formed by graphene C atoms and is

usually referred to by pz, but in this work we will refer to them by out-of-plane p-orbitals,

or p⊥ for short, for reasons that will soon become clear. These orbitals will form weaker π-

bonds with the neighboring p⊥ orbitals, being the ones responsible for electronic conduction

along the graphene plane.

Therefore, in the structure shown in Fig. 1, the chain formed by atoms 1 and 2 will

have p⊥ orbitals perpendicular to the xz plane, while the chain formed by atoms 3 and 4

will have p⊥ orbitals perpendicular to the yz plane. Each individual chain has an extended

one-dimensional π-bond network parallel to the plane in which it is contained, as well as σ

bonds connecting the atoms in the chains. However, now the overlap between p⊥ orbitals

of chains of atoms 1 − 2 and 3 − 4 are also perpendicular to each other, and their overlap is

null. Also, each p⊥ now only forms two π bonds, in contrast to the three it would form in

graphene.

While the 90◦ rotation between zigzag chains still allows for the formation of a σ-bond

through the sp2 hybrids that lie along the line that connects neighboring perpendicular

chains, no π-bonds are formed between them now, and we propose that this lack of a π bond

weakens the inter-chain C-C bonds, making them longer than their intra-chain counterparts.

In order to test this hypothesis, we resort to a simple model of an ethylene (C2H4) molecule,

in which each C atom has three hybrid sp2 orbitals. One sp2 hybrid will form a σ-bond with

another sp2 orbital from the other C atom and, on each C atom, the other two sp2 hybrids

7

will bond to the H atoms. The remaining p⊥ orbitals will form a π-bond, as shown in Figure

2 (a).

FIG. 2. (a) Ethylene molecule, C2H4, in its ground state. sp2 hybrids from one CH2 unit will form

one σ bond with the C atom from the other CH2 unit and non-hybridized p⊥ orbitals will form a

π bond. The remaining sp2 hybrids bond to H atoms. (b) Rotating the plane of sp2 hybrids of one

CH2 unit around the σ bond weakens it due to breaking of the π bond.

We test our hypothesis by performing two simple DFT calculations for the ethylene

molecule: one for its equilibrium geometry, where all sp2 hybrids are contained in the same

plane, and another where pi-bonds are broken by rotation of one of the CH2 units by 90◦.

After full relaxation of the two geometries, we find that the C-C bond for the twisted

geometry is 0.085 A larger than the C-C bond length in the equilibrium geometry. This

is comparable to the 0.054 A difference in lengths of the inter- and intra-chain C-C bond

lengths in the H-0 lattice. Hence, we propose that this is the basic mechanism behind the

different inter- and intra-chain bond lengths in the H-0 lattice, with the discrepancies in the

bond length differences being due to the H-0 being a solid.

We now turn to the electronic structure of the H-0 lattice. Figure 3 shows the band

structure from our DFT calculations and those from the TB calculations of Ref. [1]. We can

see that while both DFT and the one-p⊥ orbital approximations predict the H-0 structure

to be metallic, the band structure is completely different in the vicinity of the Fermi level,

EF .

In particular, the particle-hole symmetry from the one-p⊥ orbital band structure is

completely lost when one fully takes into account the electronic structure. As we have

shown elsewhere, this is due to the fact that in setting up the TB Hamiltonian in Ref. [1]

the carbon chemistry is incorrectly taken into account: the TB band structure shown in Fig.

3-(b) is, in fact, an s-orbital band structure, and not a p-orbital one. As we will show now, a

8

FIG. 3. Band structure from (a) DFT and (b) from the one-p⊥ orbital TB calculation of Ref. [1]

for the H-0 structure. The Fermi level is set to zero in either case.

nearest-neighbor (n.n.) TB Hamiltonian, even if taking into account the correct orientation

of p orbitals, is insufficient to describe the electronic structure of the H-0 lattice.

While DFT calculations provide a fully detailed description of the electronic structure,

they do so at the expense of simplicity of description.

It is harder to make controlled

approximations in DFT calculations than in other theoretical frameworks, such as TB theory.

In order to try and explain the discrepancies between DFT and the TB calculations of Ref.

[1], we resort to the Extended Huckel Theory [23], which is itself also a TB approximation.

Figure 4 shows the band structures resulting from an EHT calculation for 1st, 2nd and

4th nearest-neighbor (n.n.) hoppings, using a parametrization for graphene [24]. From

these band structures it is clear that it is mandatory to go beyond the simple nearest-

neighbor hopping approximation if one wants to reproduce the DFT bands: a 1st n.n.

Huckel approximation yields a band structure completely discrepant from those predicted

by DFT. It is especially problematic that flat bands appear along one of the high symmetry

lines in our 1st n.n. Huckel calculation exactly on top of the Fermi level. These flat bands

indicate no significant overlap between p orbitals, which confer these bands' predominant

character, occurs. Since these flat bands disappear when considering hoppings up to 2nd

n.n. and increasingly good agreement between the DFT and Huckel calculations is achieved

as interactions between farther neighbors are considered, our EHT calculations show that

only 1st n.n.

interactions, as considered in Ref.

[1], are insufficient to describe the H-0

9

FIG. 4. Band structures for the H-0 structure. (a) Band structure from DFT calculation. (b)-(d)

Band structures from EHT calculations for 1st, 2nd and 4th nearest-neighbor hopping, respectively.

lattice's electronic structure. This will be important for the interpretation of the transport

properties of the H-0 lattice, which we will analyze next.

3.2.

Interplay of atomic geometry, electronic structure and transport properties

In this section, we proceed to a further analysis of the interplay of the atomic geometry of

the H-0 lattice and its electronic structure, and how they influence the transport properties

of this material. For ease of analysis, we now define the nomenclature we will use to refer to

the two other p orbitals perpendicular to p⊥ orbitals. Generally speaking, we will have one

10

p orbital parallel to the inter-chain bonds, to which we will refer to pic, and another which

will always be parallel to the plane of the zigzag chain to which it belongs, which we shall

denote as pzp. For the zigzag chains formed by atom pair 1-2 in Fig. 1, for example, pzp

would lie in the xz plane, while for the zigzag chain formed by atom pair 3-4 it would lie in

the yz plane. pic orbitals, in turn, would lie along the bonds between atoms 1-4 and atoms

2-3, parallel to the cartesian z-axis.

FIG. 5. DFT DOS for the H-0 lattice. Black, solid line: total DOS; red, dashed line: PDOS

from p⊥ orbitals; blue, dashed line: PDOS for pzp orbitals (perpendicular to p⊥, parallel to the

zigzag chain that contains it); magenta, long dash-dotted line: PDOS for pic orbitals (parallel to

inter-chain bonds, also perpendicular to p⊥). Inset: DOS for an isolated graphene sheet (black

lines) and for an infinite stack of graphene sheets (red, dashed lines), where the separation between

layers is the H-0 structure's lattice parameter, a = 2.553 A.

Figure 5 shows the electronic density of states (DOS) for the relaxed H-0 lattice, along

with the Projected DOS (PDOS) for all p orbitals. The portion of the DOS in the vicinity

11

of EF is largely due to p⊥ orbitals, as expected, but it displays two curious flat features,

one just below and one just above EF . In order to understand the origin of the flat features

close to EF , we perform a simple DOS calculation for an essentially isolated graphene sheet,

and an infinite AA stacking of graphene sheets separated by the H-0 lattice parameter, a.

The inset of Figure 5 shows the DOS for both an isolated graphene sheet and for an

infinite stacking of graphene sheets. For the stacked sheets, a flat feature appears at EF , as

a result of the overlap of the π-bond networks of adjacent graphene sheets, leading to the

formation of σ bonds by p⊥ orbitals of adjacent graphene sheets. In this geometry, besides

interacting with the p⊥ orbital immediately above it, each p⊥ orbital interacts with three

other p⊥ orbitals present in the plane of the graphene sheet.

In the H-0 structure, however, the flat feature is displaced towards lower energies, lying

below EF , while the DOS still has a sizable value at this energy. Our explanation is that

the flat feature below EF is due mainly to the interaction between p⊥ in adjacent parallel

zigzag chains, while the finite DOS at EF is due mainly to the 1-D π bond network of indi-

vidual zigzag chains. This explanation, as we will see later, is consistent with the transport

properties predicted for the H-0 lattice.

From Fig. 5, it is also evident that pzp and pic orbitals will not contribute to electronic

transport at biases lower than 0.5 V, since their contribution to the total DOS only becomes

non-negligible at 1.5 eV below EF . Considering the PDOS and the geometry of the H-0

structure therefore suggests it might have strongly anisotropic electronic transport proper-

ties, which we now analyze in detail through non-equilibrium Green's functions calculations.

Here, we consider two possible electronic transport directions: one along either of the zigzag

chains in the unit cell, and one along the inter-chain direction. As explained in Section 2.3,

electronic transport is assumed to occur along the cartesian z direction. The two different

scattering regions used for our calculations, which involve re-orienting the unit cell accord-

ingly, are shown in Figure 6 (b) (inter-chain bonds along cartesian z direction) and 4 (c)-(e)

(zigzag chain along the cartesian z direction). Only one electronic transport calculation is

performed for the zigzag chains, since the H-0 structure has a 90◦ rotation symmetry around

the inter-chain bond direction.

Figure 6 (a) shows the transmission curves for the two scattering regions considered. For

electronic transport along the inter-chain direction, transmission in the vicinity of Fermi level

(black) is indeed zero, whereas for the scattering region with zigzag chains parallel to the

12

FIG. 6.

(a) Transmission curves for electronic transport along the direction parallel to inter-

chain chemical bonds (black line) and along zigzag chains (red line). (b)-(d) Total current flowing

through the H-0 structure in different orientations. Electron flow is indicated by red arrows, and

its intensity is proportional to arrow thickness. (b) Total current for inter-chain bonds parallel to

the electronic transport direction. No electronic current is observed. (c) Side view of the structure.

Electron flow happens along zigzag chains, with a smaller contribution from tunneling between the

perpendicular zigzag chains. (d) Rear view of the H-0 orientation of Fig. 6 (d). Current flow is

perpendicular to the page.

transport direction, twelve electronic channels are present, thus confirming our hypothesis

of strongly anisotropic electronic transport. We should stress that the local current we

present is obtained for zero bias calculations. It is, strictly speaking, the projection of the

transmittance between two states, and not a real electronic current. Nevertheless, for weak

electronic bias, the real electronic current should not be too different from the presented

results.

Figures 6 (b)-(e) show the local current for both scattering region orientations, with

electronic flow happening in the direction indicated by the arrows, and arrow thickness

proportional to current intensity (projected transmittance). Clearly in the case where inter-

chain bonds lie along the transport direction, no current flows through the structure, and

along this direction, the H-0 lattice is an insulator. On the other hand, when zigzag chains

lie along the transport direction, we can separate the current into two components with

13

different intensities: a more intense current flow along the zigzag chains lying parallel to the

electronic transport direction, and a less intense one between the zigzag chains perpendicular

to those where more intense current flows.

Both currents can be understood with the aid of the PDOS shown in Figure 5 and

the EHT calculations presented in Section 3.1. The more intense current, which occurs

along the zigzag chains, takes place along the π bond network formed by the p⊥ orbitals.

Therefore the energy levels corresponding to the π-bond network should be closer to EF .

The less intense current is due to tunneling between the zigzag chains perpendicular to

the transport direction and therefore occurs through overlapping p⊥ orbitals from adjacent

parallel chains. In a TB interpretation, this is a 2nd n.n.

interaction between p orbitals,

arising from the proximity of the zigzag chains; in turn the proximity of p⊥ orbitals is related,

as we conjectured early, to the hump in the PDOS at EF shown in the inset of Fig. 5. Once

more, interactions between 2nd n.n.

lead to important and interesting effects, this time in

the electronic transport properties of the lattice, which would not be captured by a simple

1st n.n. TB approximation, such as that used in Ref. [1].

In order to understand why transport is negligible along the inter-chain directions, we

resort to a COHP [26] analysis to determine the bonding/anti-bonding character of the

intra- and inter-chain chemical bonds. Figures 7 (a) and 7 (b) show the COHP curves for

the orbitals involved in the bonding for the two different chemical bonds present in the H-0

lattice. The COHP curves reveal that in a zigzag chain the chemical bond has a greater

bonding character especially due to the π-bonds formed by the p⊥ orbitals of the C atoms.

However, COHP for inter-chain C-C bonds reveals a non-negligible anti-bonding character

close to EF , consistent with the fact that transport along the inter-chain direction is null.

The transport properties predicted for the H-0 lattice could allow for its use in two

applications: gas sensors and a nanodynamometer. For use as a gas sensor, a thin film of

the material, grown in such that a surface in the orientation of Fig. 6-b is present, might

show differences in measured electronic surface currents. In Fig. 6-c, consider the uppermost

zigzag chains as the surface. Electronic transport should happen both along the zigzag C

chain, on the π-bond network formed by p⊥ orbitals, or along the perpendicular direction,

due to frontal overlap of p⊥ orbitals of adjacent zigzag C chains on the surface. It is likely

that adsorbed molecules would act as scattering centers to the electronic currents due to

changes in hybridization of pzp and, possibly, of p⊥ orbitals. As in graphene-based gas

14

FIG. 7. (a) COHP curve for p orbitals taking part in the intra-chain chemical bonds (atoms 1-2 or

3-4 of Fig. 1). Red, solid line: p⊥−p⊥ orbitals; blue, solid line: COHP for all pzp, pic orbitals; black,

dashed line: COHP for all p orbitals. In both cases, only non-zero COHP curves are displayed.

(b) COHP curve for p orbitals taking part in the inter-chain chemical bonds (atoms 2-3 or 1-4 of

Fig. 1). Subscripts ch1 and ch2 refer to each of the zigzag chains in the unit cell. Red, solid line:

p⊥,ch1 − pzp,ch2 orbitals; green, dashed line: pzp,ch1 − p⊥,ch2 orbitals; blue, solid line: COHP for

pic,ch1 − pic,ch2 orbitals; black, dashed line: COHP for all p orbitals.

sensors [27], each individual molecule will induce a particular hybridization change, leading

to sensitivity variation.

For use as a nanodynamometer, the frontal overlap of p⊥ orbitals would be the key player.

A force applied perpendicular to sets of parallel zigzag chains would deform the material,

thus leading to a change in the overlap of p⊥ orbitals which, in turn, would cause the

electronic currents to vary. The current differences would be therefore directly linked to the

deformation of the material, allowing for determination of the applied force after calibration.

The principle is similar to the nanodynamometer of Poklonski et al [28], who propose such

a device based on bilayer graphene, but it could be more practical than the one made of

graphene bilayers since with the H-0 lattice there would be no possibility of slipping layers,

in contrast with the bilayer graphene device.

15

4. CONCLUSIONS

In this work, the structural, electronic and transport properties of carbon-based graphitic

family materials (H-0), as proposed in Ref. [1], were discussed using DFT, EHT and non-

equilibrium Green's functions transport calculations. We have shown that its geometry

implies a spatial orientation of unhybridized p⊥ orbitals (usually denoted as pz) such that

it has 1D π bond networks, in contrast with the 2D network of graphene. This confers it

anisotropic electronic transport properties, being an insulator or a conductor depending on

the crystalline direction considered.

We have also shown that a simple tight-binding model with only 1st n.n.

interactions

and one p orbital per C atom is unable to adequately describe the electronic structure and

transport properties of this material. In particular, the electronic transport properties of

the H-0 can only be accounted for if 2nd n.n.

interactions are considered, since they are

related to the σ overlap between p⊥ orbitals from adjacent parallel zigzag chains of C atoms

in the solid. Our calculations indicate that, while this σ interaction is one of the interactions

that causes the H-0 lattice to be metallic, electronic transport is due mostly to the 1-D π

bond network of individual zigzag chains. We have also discussed possible applications of

this material in devices such as gas sensors and nanodynamometers; further calculations to

assess the usefulness of the H-0 lattice in such devices are currently under way.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

M. Ver´ıssimo-Alves and A. S. Martins acknowledge funding agency FAPERJ for financial

support through grants E-26/111.397/2014 and E-26/112.554/2012.

[1] K. Mullen, B. Uchoa and D. T. Glatzhofer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 026403 (2015).

[2] K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. C. Maan,

G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim, and A. K. Geim, Science 315, 1379 (2007).

[3] M. I. Katsnelson, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Nature Physics 2, 620 (2006).

[4] H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. OBrien, R. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature 318, 162

(1985).

16

[5] R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, "Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes",

World Scientific (1999).

[6] C. Jin, H. Lan, L. Peng, K. Suenaga, and S. Iijima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 205501 (2009).

[7] L. Shen, M. Zeng, S-W Yang, C. Zhang, X. Wang and Y. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132, 11481

(2010).

[8] P. R. Wallace, Phys. Rev. 71, 622 (1947).

[9] G. E. Kimball, J. Chem. Phys. 3, 560 (1935).

[10] C. Hierold (Ed.), "Carbon Nanotube Devices: Properties, Modeling, Integration and Appli-

cations", Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA (2008); Nature Nanotech. 9 (Focus issue:

Graphene Applications) (2014).

[11] K. A. Modic, T. E. Smidt, I. Kimchi, N. P. Breznay, A. Biffin, S. Choi, R. D. Johnson,

R. Coldea, P. Watkins-Curry, G. T. McCandless, J. Y. Chan, F. Gandara, Z. Islam, A.

Vishwanath, A. Shekhter, R. D. McDonald and J. G. Analytis, Nat. Commun. 5, 4203 (2014).

[12] M. Ver´ıssimo-Alves, R. G. Amorim and A. S. Martins, arXiv:1602.06264, accepted for publi-

cation in Phys. Rev. Lett..

[13] P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 136, B864 (1964) ; W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys.

Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).

[14] J. M. Soler, E. Artacho, J. D. Gale, A. Garc´ıa, J. Junquera, P. Ordej´on and Daniel S´anchez-

Portal, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 14, 2745 (2002).

[15] N. Troullier and J. L. Martins, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1993 (1991).

[16] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[17] H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 13, 5188 (1976).

[18] F. Birch, Physical Review 71, 809 (1947).

[19] J. Cerd´a and F. Soria, Phys. Rev. B 61, 7965 (2000).

[20] M. Brandbyge, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordej´on, J. Taylor and K. Stokbro, Phys. Rev. B, 65, 165401

(2002).

[21] C. Caroli, R. Combescot, P. Nozieres and D. Saint-James, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 4,

916929 (1971).

[22] M. Paulsson and M. Brandbyge, Phys. Rev. B, 76, 115117 (2007).

[23] A. S. Martins and M. Ver´ıssimo-Alves, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 26, 365501 (2014).

[24] J. Cerd´a, J. Appl. Phys 100, 043714 (2006).

17

[25] R. Saito, G. Dresselhaus and M. S. Dresselhaus, Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes,

World Scientific Press (1998).

[26] R. Dronskowski and P. E. Blochl, J. Phys. Chem. 97, 8617 (1993).

[27] Y.-H. Zhang, Y.-B. Chen, K.-G. Zhou, C.-H. Liu, J. Zeng, H.-L. Zhang and Y. Peng, Nan-

otechnology 20, 185504 (2009).

[28] N. A. Poklonski, A. I. Siahlo, S. A. Vyrko, A. M. Popov, Yu. E. Lozovik, I. V. Lebedeva and

A. A. Knizhnik, J. Comput. Theor. Nanosci. 10 (2013).

18

