Probing the validity of the diffuse mismatch model for phonons

using atomistic simulations

Rohit R. Kakodkar and Joseph P. Feser∗

Department of Mechanical Engineering,

University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716 USA

(Dated: September 19, 2018)

Abstract

Due to it's simplicity the diffuse mismatch model (DMM) remains a popular description of

phonon transmission across solid-solid boundaries. However, it remains unclear in which situations

the DMM should be expected to be a valid model of the underlying physics. Here, its validity

is investigated mode-by-mode using a 3-dimensional extension of the frequency domain, perfectly

matched layer (FD-PML) method, to study the interface between face-centered cubic solids with

interdiffused atoms. While submonolayer levels of interdiffusion are found to increase the number

of available modes for transmission, consistent qualitatively with the DMM, we do not find quanti-

tative or qualitative convergence toward the DMM at higher levels of interdiffusion. In particular,

contrary to the fundamental assumption of the DMM, modes are not found to lose memory of

their initial polarization and wavevector. The transmission coefficients of randomly interdiffused

and smoothly-graded interfaces are also compared. While smoothly graded interfaces show strong

anti-reflection properties, selection rules still prohibit transmission of many modes, whereas inter-

diffused interfaces are not subject to such rules and achieve similar thermal interface conductance

by transmitting with lower probability but using a wider range of modes.

7
1
0
2

 

n
a
J
 

6
1

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

2
v
2
7
5
8
0

.

7
0
6
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

I.

INTRODUCTION

At the interface between two atomically conformal solids, discontinuities in the vibra-

tional properties result in a finite thermal boundary conductance (TBC) for phononic heat

transport. The TBC becomes especially important whenever multiple interfaces are closely

spaced together or when heat originates from sources which are highly confined by interfaces.

Examples of the former include superlattices, thin films, and high density nanocomposites.

Examples of the latter include finFET transistors, phase-change memory, and the plasmonic

transducer of a heat-assisted magnetic recording head1. Despite the technological impor-

tance of engineering TBC, there are still no widely accepted theories for predicting TBC

a priori that are in excellent agreement with experiment, though modern theories based

on the diffuse mismatch model (DMM) do generally predict the correct order of magnitude

over the entire range of temperature. There are generally two well-developed theoreti-

cal frameworks that have been established for modelling TBC: (1) direct non-equilibrium

computational simulations in the time-domain by molecular dynamics and (2) phonon-gas

treatments which attempt to determine the transport contribution from each phonon mode.

Landry et al2 have compared TBC predictions obtained using Molecular Dynamics in the

harmonic limit with those obtained using both equilibrium and non-equilibrium phonon

gas approaches using transmission coefficients (τ ) determined through a Lattice Dynamics

based scattering boundary method. Their results only show good agreement between the

near-equilibrium phonon gas approach and the MD approach at mass ratios, mr > 2, while

for smaller mass ratios they show that the non-equilibrium correction can be applied to

the phonon gas treatment. However, in conventional MD approaches, mode-by-mode in-

formation is not obtained, which limits the theoretical insights obtainable by such models.

However, recent developments combining modal analysis with MD may reverse this trend3 -- 6.

One potential advantage of the MD approach is the natural inclusion of inelastic phonon

interactions whenever large displacements are present. This manuscript focuses on the latter

approach.

Using the phonon gas approach, the thermal interface conductance can be calculated by

performing integration over k-space in the first Brillouin zone as7

2

(cid:90)(cid:90)(cid:90)

(cid:88)

1

(2π)3

p

{vg.n>0}∈BZ

G =

ω(vg.n)τ1→2

∂f
∂T

d3k.

(1)

Here, ω is the phonon frequency, vg is the group velocity, n is the unit normal to the inter-

face plane, τ1→2 is the energy transmission coefficient, and f is the Bose-Einstein statistical

distribution. Due to the advent of density functional theory, obtaining the phonon disper-

sions and group velocities on either side of the interface is typically trivial, but methods of

modelling transmission coefficients at solid-solid interfaces remain controversial.

Initial attempts to theoretically describe transmission coefficient included the Acoustic

Mismatch Model (AMM)8, which treats incident phonon reflection and transmission using

continuum mechanics approximations. Simple versions of this theory predict that energy

transmission coefficients for phonons depend only on acoustic impedance mismatch. How-

ever, at room temperature thermal interface conductance in most materials is dominated by

phonons with wavelength comparable to interatomic distances. Thus, the AMM is generally

not appropriate for room temperature solids, though it may correctly describe the behaviour

of some low frequency phonons that are significant at low temperatures. Lattice Dynamics

(LD) models9,10 and the Scattering Mediated Acoustic Mismatch Model(SMAMM)11 were

therefore developed to give a more accurate treatment of phonon dispersion and transmis-

sion coefficients throughout the first Brillouin zone, including the short wavelength phonons

absent in the AMM. However, these models generally still employ an idealized model of the

interface: smooth and epitaxial. Fundamentally, these approaches assume coherent trans-

port of phonons across the interface and do not account for inelastic phenomena.

The diffuse mismatch model (DMM) was developed to handle the opposite extreme12.

In the DMM, it is assumed that the interface is disordered such that, whatever the details

of the interfacial structure and bonding, incident phonons are scattered so intensely that

they lose memory of the polarization and direction from which they originated. Using the

principle of detailed balance and conservation of energy, the transmission coefficient of an

incident phonon depends only on its incident energy and is given by

τ1→2(ω) =

I1(ω)

I1(ω) + I2(ω)

,

(2)

where

3

(cid:90)(cid:90)

(cid:88)

Ij(ξ) =

p

k:ω(k)=ξ

(vj
g(k, p).n)
g(k, p) dSk,p.
vj

(3)

A numerically discretized version of this equation was given by Reddy7, previously. The

integration in Eq. 3 is to be performed over k-space surfaces with constant frequency and
polarization. For isotropic phonon dispersions in the low frequency limit, where ω = cpk ,
the isofrequency surfaces are spheres, and the simpler expressions originally given by Swartz

and Pohl are recovered12. An important prediction of the DMM according to Eq. 2 is that

the phonon transmission probability is purely a function of frequency.

The diffuse mismatch model does not consider the details of interface structure. How-

ever, a variety of computational approaches have been developed that can simulate phonon-

structure interactions considering specific atomic placements/bonding at the interface. The

two most highly developed of these are Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations and the

Atomistic Green's Function method (AGF)13. These methods have previously been used to

study a number of microscopic effects that are important to thermal boundary resistance,

including pressure14,15, interfacial bond strength16, grain boundaries17, and lattice mismatch

between the materials interfaced18. Molecular dynamics can be used either to directly simu-

late macroscopic transport properties19 or to test the mode resolved transmission properties

of energy across an interface. In the latter case, wavepackets are prepared and their interac-

tion with a structure is tracked in the time-domain20,21. Wavepacket MD can present some

challenges though, since a wavepacket necessarily contains a spectrum of phonon frequen-

cies. To accommodate a wavepacket, the simulation domain size must be larger than the

wavelengths to be simulated, and the wave must be tracked long enough to complete its

interaction with the structure, which can be a challenging for highly dispersive modes. The

atomistic Green's function method has no such restrictions, but considers only harmonic

bonding and is fairly limited in terms of its maximum domain size.

The approach here is to utilize an atomistic, mode-resolved computational method to

directly simulate the phonon transmission coefficient of the interface between face-centered

cubic solids with interdiffused atoms. The purpose is to directly test the validity of the

diffuse mismatch model mode-by-mode, and to characterize the transition from specular

to diffuse transmission behaviour as a function of disorder parameters, with the goal of

trying to understand when an epitaxial interface should be considered smooth or rough

4

from the the point-of-view of phonon transport. Previously, several other works22 -- 24 have

found that small interdiffusion layers result in higher thermal interface conductance. Tian

et al.22 attributed this enhancement in TBC to increased density of states overlap due

to interdiffusion. In accordance with this hypothesis, English et al.25 found that thermal

boundary conductance can also be increased by inclusion of an intermediate layer with

mediating vibrational properties (achieved by varying the mass of the intermediate layer).

Furthermore, Zhao et al26 studied geometrically roughened Si/Ge interfaces between FCC

crystal structures. Their results indicate that the overall thermal conductance is independent

of roughness parameters.

While several atomistic computation methods are available, we use the recently developed

frequency-domain perfectly matched layer (FD-PML) method27, rather than the Atomistic

Green's Function (AGF) approach or wavepacket MD, since the FD-PML technique natu-

rally concerns the energy reflection/transmission coefficient of a single incident wavevector

and polarization.

II. METHODOLOGY

The FD-PML method27 involves frequency domain decomposition of the atomistic equa-

tion of motions of each atom, and solving for a scattering systems response to an incident

plane wave of specified wavevector and polarization. A perfectly matched layer (PML) is

used on the boundary of the scattering system to damp scattered waves without spurious

reflections of the scattered waves back into the scattering system. Thus, a well-designed

PML makes the boundary of the scattering system indistinguishable from a boundary that

allows infinite propagation. Like the AGF method, FD-PML reduces scattering problems

to a system of sparse, banded linear algebraic equations, but FD-PML has better scalability

to large system sizes since it does not require storage of a fully inverted matrix and can

thus utilize efficient, low memory iterative solver algorithms. In our original description of

the FD-PML method, the method was demonstrated in one- and two-dimensions27. Details

of its generalization to 3D for arbitrary crystal structures and bonding are given in an Ap-

pendix. Disorder is introduced using random interdiffusion of the atomic masses from each

interface (Fig. 1). To emulate physical interdiffusion, the masses of each atom are assigned

5

FIG. 1. Cross-section of the simulated interface. The colorbar indicates the mass ratio m/mSi

6

FIG. 2. Schematic of the Computational Domain. Hard wall boundary conditions are applied at

edges perpendicular to z-direction and periodic boundaries are applied along all other edges.

with probability,

(cid:20)

1
2

1 − erf

P1(z) =

(cid:18) z − z0

√
(cid:96)

2

(cid:19)(cid:21)

,

(4)

where z0 is the location of ideal interface and where P1 is the probability of finding an atom of

type 1 at location z; (cid:96) is the characteristic interdiffusion length and erf is the error function.

By definition, if an atom type is not 1, then it must be 2. To maintain simplicity, we study

interfaces between FCC crystals. Our base case is an idealization of a Si/Ge interface. True

Si/Ge takes the diamond crystal structure, but we adopt the approach of Tamura et al28

of modelling the two atom per primitive unit cell diamond structure as a single atom per

primitive unit cell FCC crystal, by lumping the mass of two atoms into one (i.e. in this model,

mSi = 56.2 amu, mGe = 145.2 amu), treating only the nearest neighbour bonding (K=42.2
N/m), and using the average lattice constant between Si and Ge (a = 5.54A). This achieves

a similar sound speed to Si and Ge, and a similar maximum frequency using a similar lattice

constant to the true crystal. We should note that by reducing the number density of atoms

by 2-fold, this has the undesirable effects of producing an artificially low heat capacity and

eliminating optical phonons, which are clearly important to the real transport properties.

However, the model is merely to demonstrate the basic physics of interface transport in

the presence of disorder, so its realism compared to Si/Ge system should not be taken too

seriously.

Our computational domain is a rectangular box composed of a central region containing

the interface with the coordinate z running perpendicular to the interface, and bounded by

perfectly matched layers of the Si and Ge in the left and right z-directions (Fig 2). The

z-width of the central region of the simulation box was 10 conventional unit cells (i.e. 10a).

The x-y directions of the box are taken to be periodic with a period in each direction of

Lx = Ly = 16a . The Born von Karman boundary conditions place restrictions on the allow-
able in-plane k-vectors for the simulations: kx = 2πn/Lx ky = 2πn/Ly, (n = 0,±1, ...± L/a)

7

; there are no restrictions on the allowable kz, however we perform the integration in Eq. 1

using a uniform mesh method spanning the upper half of the first Brillouin zone29; for

k-points where the z-component of incident group velocity is negative, the corresponding
k-point with positive group velocity is instead simulated (i.e. k → −k). It was found that
reducing the areal dimension by half of the interface did not significantly affect the calcu-

lated transmission coefficients for the range of disorder length ((cid:96)) studied. The PML region

width was chosen using our previous non-dimensional optimization criteria27, which found
that larger wavelength requires larger PML domain sizes to maintain accuracy (L ≈ 2λ for
2-digit accuracy of transmission coefficients). Additional details regarding the PML design

are given in the Appendix. Thus, typical simulation boxes including the PML contained be-

tween 10,000 - 80,000 atoms, with the larger size corresponding to long-wavelength phonon

simulations. For each level of interdiffusion, the energy transmission coefficients for 24,960

individual phonon modes were calculated using a uniform k-grid in the Brillouin zone. In

order to solve such a large system using minimal computing resources, we used sparse, it-

erative solvers. The biconjugate gradient method and the generalized minimum residual

methods were both found to be effective without preconditioners. Note that because of the

roughness of the interface, there were no guaranteed symmetries in the kx-ky plane, though

as we will show one does nearly recover cubic symmetries for statistically large simulation

domains. Once the transmission coefficient, frequency, and group velocity of each mode are

known, the thermal interface conductance can be easily calculated using Eq. 1. For the

case of a flat interface, the Lattice Dynamics technique developed by Young and Maris9 was

used to validate our transmission coefficients in a mode-by-mode manner. That technique

is specifically designed to study the phonon transmission across the interface between FCC

materials with a one atom basis, bonded by nearest neighbor forces, which exactly conforms

to our computational case. For those k-points where the lattice dynamics approach is nu-

merically stable, the predicted transmission coefficients were identical to better than 0.01.

Interface conductance for a flat interface obtained for a similar test case was reported by

Zhao26 as G=111 MW/m2-K, with the only difference being the use of a bonding strength

in the FCC-Ge material, 0.88 times the value used here and by Tamura28. We find a value

of G=123 MW/m2-K in this case, consistent with the lower degree of mismatch between

materials.

8

FIG. 3. Normalized thermal interface conductance as a function of normalized roughness length.

Here G is the thermal interface conductance obtained from simulations and GDM M is the TBC

obtained using DMM, a is the lattice parameter of FCC-Si.

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

It is instructive to observe the collective behaviour of thermal boundary conductance prior

to discussing a mode-by-mode analysis. Figure 3 shows the thermal boundary conductance

as a function of the interdiffusion distance, (cid:96) . If the Diffuse mismatch model (DMM) is a

valid description of transport for a disordered interface, then one expects that as disorder is

increased, G should tend toward the DMM value. Interestingly, Fig 3 indicates that this is

not the case.

In the large interdiffusion limit ((cid:96) = 1.6a), we see that the thermal interface conductance

is not approaching the DMM value. For the model Si/Ge interface here, the DMM result

for G is greater than that for a perfect interface. In Fig 3, it can be seen that small levels of

interdiffusion do increase G to 85% of the DMM value. However, the maximum corresponds

to submonolayer interdiffusion distances, (cid:96). Beyond this level of interdiffusion, the thermal

interface conductance is observed to fall monotonically and thus does not converge toward
the DMM. In the thick interface limit ((cid:96) → ∞), one might expect G ∼ (cid:96)−1 (i.e. rather
than an interface conductance, one might think of the region as having a bulk thermal con-
ductivity describing the resistance, (cid:96)/k ∼ 1/G). However, Fig. 3 doesnt show convergence
toward that diffusive limit either; this is clear because the rate of decrease in G is weakening

9

with increased (cid:96). Previously Tian et al.22 observed qualitatively similar results using AGF

method, where interdiffusion at the interface of a Si/Ge (diamond structure) interface ini-

tially increased TBC followed by a monotonic decrease with greater levels of intediffusion.

However, they did not compare their results to the DMM. In contrast, Zhou et al.30 used

NEMD to characterize TBC of roughness in the form of geometrically wavy interfaces (not

interdiffused), and found that G monotonically increases with increasing roughness length;

this was attributed to an effective increase in surface area of the interface.

In order to understand the physics behind this behaviour, we analysed mode resolved

transmission coefficient data over the entire Brillouin Zone. The phonon dispersion for each

material is given in Fig 4 along the high symmetry lines. The corresponding phonon trans-

mission coefficients are given in Fig 5 for phonons incident from side 1 (Si), corresponding

to the longitudinal and the two transverse phonon polarizations. The predictions for a per-

fectly smooth interface and the DMM are provided for comparison. Comparing Fig 4 & 5,

several important effects can be seen.

FIG. 4. Dispersion relation for FCC-Si and FCC-Ge along high symmetry lines

One of the most distinctive effects of disorder is to make certain types of mode conversion

possible, and consequently to increase the number of available pathways for transmission. In

Figs. 5b and 4c, an example of this can be seen in the transverse modes traveling along Γ-X:

these have identically zero transmission coefficient for a perfectly smooth interface once the

frequency is higher than the maximum frequency of TA phonons on the Ge side. However,

submonolayer levels of disorder change this, enabling the high frequency/wavevector TA

10

FIG. 5. Transmission coefficient along some high symmetry lines for the longitudinal (a) and

transverse (b & c) phonon polarizations. For each polarization, the simulation results are given for

an ideal interface, for three levels of interdiffusion and for mass-graded interface. The prediction

of the diffuse mismatch model is given for reference.

11

phonons in Si to scatter into longitudinal modes of the Ge. However, the value of the

transmission coefficients in this region never reaches as high as predicted by the DMM,

and eventually decreases at higher interdiffusion levels. The DMM, thus contains some of

the right physics (i.e.

increased mode conversion), but does not quantitatively match the

transmission coefficient predicted by an atomistic approach. Previously, Tian et al have

attributed increase in TBC to increased overlap of density of states of the materials across

the interface due to intermixing22. However, figure 5 indicates that this is more likely to be

due an increase in the number of transmission pathways.

Additional violations of the DMMs predictions can be seen throughout the Brillouin zone

in Fig 6. The DMM predicts that all incident modes with equal frequency have the same

probability of transmission (see Eq 2). Fig 6 compares the frequency contours in the kx-kz

plane of the Brillouin zone to the computed values of the transmission coefficient for three dif-

ferent levels of interdiffusion ( 0, 0.4a, and 1.6a top to bottom) and for all three polarizations

(LA, TA1, TA2 left-to-right). Note that the figure denotes the coordinate of the incident

phonon. For a smooth interface, the transmission coefficients do not follow the isofrequency

contours, and the transmission coefficients are typically stronger for modes directed toward

the interface; this is especially true for the TA modes. The incident TA1 phonons show a

peak transmission coefficient along the Γ-K direction associated with a mid-zone maximum

in the dispersion relation. Interdiffusion can be seen to have two primary effects in Fig. 6.

Fig. 6b shows that even (cid:96) = 0.4a is enough to greatly broaden the participation of modes in

transport. While this low level of interdiffusion does not yield transmission coefficients that

are consistent with the DMM (Fig. 6d) throughout the entire Brillouin zone, the changes

are such that many of the high wavevector modes in the center of the Brillouin zone that

dominate the thermal interface integral (Eq. 1) do have similar transmission coefficient. On

the other hand, further increases to the interdiffusion distance (Fig 6c) results in the general

decrease in all transmission coefficients with shorter wavelength phonons being dispropor-

tionately affected. One might attribute this to scattering, though as we've noted above

the interface conductance in Fig. 3 does not appear to be converging to a diffusive limit,
G ∼ (cid:96)−1. Even at the large level of interdiffusion in Fig. 6c, the transmission coefficients to
not follow the isofrequency lines. This shows quite clearly that a fundamental assumption

of the DMM is incorrect at the mode-by-mode level: a phonon mode's transmission coeffi-

cient is not independent of its incident wavevector and polarization, and dependent only on

12

FIG. 6.

(contour) Variation of transmission coefficients along the x-z plane of the BZ for FCC-Ar

for a. Ideal Interface b. Rough interfaces with (cid:96)= 0.4a and c. (cid:96) = 1.6a d. DMM prediction. The

colour contour represents the transmission coefficients, white contour lines indicate the isofrequency

lines with their values in THz

13

FIG. 7. Transmission coefficient for a smoothly mass graded interface with characteristic distance,

(cid:96) = 1.6a. For comparison, a mass gradient achieved by interdiffusion is given in Fig. 6c.

frequency (i.e. memory-less). While one should not expect long wavelength modes to act

diffusely since they do not react to local disorder as strongly, Fig. 6c shows that even many

short wavelength modes maintain memory of their incident direction.

Finally, we would note that an interdiffused interface is one way to achieve a graded

transition between interfaces. Several groups have proposed that a gradation between lay-

ers could enhance thermal interface conductance either by providing a material with an

intermediate matching of density of states19 (i.e. SiGe intermediate layer) or by acting as

a coherent anti-reflection coating31,32. Due to the disorder being on the same length scale

as the phonon wavelengths, the phonon transmission behavior of an interdiffused interface

bares little in common with that of a smoothly graded mass transition. To demonstrate this,

we constructed a simulation where, rather than having statistically placed masses, a smooth

transition in the masses (Fig. 1d) is assumed between materials, over a characteristic dis-

tance, (cid:96). At any atomic site at coordinate, z, the mass of the atom is given deterministically

(cid:20)

(cid:18)z − z0

(cid:19)(cid:21)

√
(cid:96)

2

by

m(z) = mSi +

mGe − mSi

2

1 + erf

.

(5)

This gives the same average mass profile as the the interdiffused case, but without the

presence of random disorder. Fig. 1 shows the schematic of different interfaces studied in this

article. Such a gradation might be impossible to achieve practically since it would require a

different homogeneous mass within each layer, but it serves as a useful point for comparison.

Figure 7 shows the resulting phonon transmission coefficient throughout the kx-kz plane of

the Brillouin zone. It can be seen that for a continuously graded interface, the transmission

14

coefficients are near unity for a wide range of incident phonon wavevectors. Thus, the smooth

mass-gradient acts as an effective phonon anti-reflection coating for phonons with sufficiently

short wavelength. However, comparing Fig. 7 with Fig. 6c shows that if the mass gradient

is instead achieved by interdiffusion over the same characteristic distance and with the

same average mass profile, the anti-reflection effect is not reproduced and the transmission

coefficients are generally smaller. Thus, these results show that a phononic anti-reflection

coatings cannot be practically realised by mere interdiffusion of materials across an extended

distance. The resulting thermal interface conductance from an interdiffused interface may

even be lower than what could be expected for either an ideal interface or a perfectly diffuse

interface, as shown in in Fig. 3 (see (cid:96) = 1.6a ). In addition, while a smooth mass gradient

produces high transmission coefficients, the predicted thermal interface conductance (145
MW/m2-K) is actually ≈9% lower than the DMM (163 MW/m2-K) and only ≈5% higher
than for the slightly interdiffused interfaces ((cid:96) = 0.2a and (cid:96) = 0.4a in Fig. 3). This is because

the smoothly graded interface with its perfect in-plane ordering appears to maintain in-

plane scattering selection rules, preventing mode conversion, and effectively blocking higher

wavenumber modes from participating in transport. The interdiffused case (cid:96) = 0.4a (Fig. 6c)

has no such restriction and achieves similar thermal interface conductance using a wider

range of transmitting modes with lower average transmission coefficient. Thus, the effect of a

high transmission coefficient obtained with a graded interface does not significantly outweigh

the effect of increased pathways for transmission brought about by interface disorder.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, the validity of the diffuse mismatch model (DMM) is investigated on a mode-

by-mode basis for interdiffused interfaces, using a 3-dimensional extension of the frequency

domain, perfectly matched layer (FD-PML) method. It is found that disorder at an interface

can increase the number of available modes for transmission, and subsequently raise the

thermal interface conductance; these general observation are consistent with the DMM.

However, while submonolayer levels of interdiffusion do reproduce similar thermal interface

conductance values as the DMM, the mode-by-mode predictions of transmission coefficient

vary drastically from the DMM. In particular, (1) contrary to the fundamental assumption of

the DMM, not all modes appear to lose memory of their initial polarization and wavevector

15

for the interdiffusion lengths studied here. (2) Interdiffusion length in excess of a monolayer

generally are found to make agreement between the DMM and the simulations worse, not

better. (3) The DMM tends to overestimate the transmission coefficient of short wavelength

phonons at interdiffused interfaces, and to underestimate in longwavelength regions.

With regards to the first point, one intriguing question remains:

if the modes arent

being diffusely scattered, then what modes are they being scattered into, and how are they

distributed? At a perfect interface, there are only 3 modes of transmission possible , while

in the DMM there are an infinite number, evenly distributed along isofrequency lines for

each polarization. If the DMM fails, then it must be because the scattered modes are not

distributed in this way, and are perhaps prevented from doing so by additional selection rules

or the physics of the scattering mechanism. The details of how this occurs remain an open

question at present, as the current FD-PML method only intrinsically tracks the incident

phonon mode (wavevector, polarization), and does not give details on the modes that are

involved in the scattered wave. In principle, though, models like scattering boundary method

are able to provide this information. Although it would be more natural for our method

to use simple modal analysis33 to obtain this information from the scattered field to gain

insight into the composition of the scattered modes, and uncover the details of the physics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research was supported in part through the use of the Farber computer cluster and

associated Information Technologies (IT) resources at the University of Delaware.

Appendix A: Extension of the FD-PML Method to 3D

The FD-PML method for phonons has previously been mathematically described and

validated for one-dimension chains as well as in two-dimensions for the specific case of

determining the scattering cross section of embedded nanoparticles with simple cubic lattice

structure and second nearest neighbor interactions27. Here a more general mathematical

description is given, valid for arbitrary 3D arrangements of atoms.

The dynamic equations governing the displacements (u) of each atom in the simulation

cell (for example, box 2 and 3 in Fig. 2) can be written in the frequency domain for each

16

atom under the harmonic approximation as

(Mω2 + K)u = 0

(A1)

where M is a diagonal mass matrix given by M = miδij (summation not implied) where
mi is the mass associate with the ith degree of freedom (each atom has 3-degrees of freedom),

and K are the interatomic force constants given by

Kij =

∂2Φ
∂ui∂uj

(A2)

where Φ is the interatomic potential and ui is the real-space displacement of the ith degree

of freedom relative to the equilibrium position. These can be obtained from ab-initio cal-

culation or based on some other description of the interatomic potentials; in the current

paper, we used the simplest possible interaction, based on nearest-neighbor bonding via

linear spring interactions. The diagonal elements for K must obey kii = −(cid:80)

i(cid:54)=j kij .

The frequency domain displacements, u, are then divided into contributions from an

incident wave (which is to be specified before the simulation) and a scattered wave (which

is to be found as part of the solution procedure): u = uinc + uscat. Typically, the context for

specifying the incident mode is self-evident, but the method provides tremendous flexibility

as to how this is accomplished, and several reasonable variations are possible. For example,

if the objective of the computation is to simulate the transmission coefficient from one bulk

material to another, the incident wave displacements would be specified as a plane wave

obeying the dispersion relation in one of the materials, and would be set to zero everywhere

the relation isn't expected to hold; so for a Si-Ge interdiffused interface, one could specify

an incident wave within some portion of the purely Si region, and zero everywhere else

(including the interdiffused zone).

As discussed thus far, the equations for the system would be given as

(Mω2 + K)uscat = −(Mω2 + K)uinc

(A3)

However, the issue of how to handle the outer boundary conditions is also critical. A

typical incident plane wave carries energy into a system, and in most physical situations

this energy is scattered or reflected by inhomogeneities. This scattered energy must be

allowed to escape the system. For reflections from interfaces, the scattered modes are also

17

expected to be infinitely extended in space, which is not possible to simulate numerically.

For scattered modes that do decay radially, the displacements are only zero infinitely far

from the scattering center; numerically setting the scattered wave displacements to zero at

any finite distance is equivalent to preventing energy from leaving the system.

To solve this issue, a special layer called a Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) is employed

at the boundaries of the simulation cell to absorb the scattered wave. The total simulation

domain can thus be decomposed into a Primary Domain (PD), which contains the scattering

problem to be solved, and a PML domain (PMLD) forming boundary layers at the edges

of the simulation domain. A PML is designed to be impedance matched with the PD34,35,

and thus minimizes artificial reflections of the scattered wave back into the PD. PMLs were

initially developed to aid solution of finite-difference time domain problems in electromag-

netics, but have been applied to a variety of problems since. Li et al36 have described their

use in time-domain discrete atomic systems, and Kakodkar et al has extended this to the

frequency domain27. Li et al36 has shown that for discrete atomic systems, the PMLD has

nearly the same equations of motion as the original system, except that atoms in the PML

possess an onsite potential and a damping force. As such, for the FD-PML method, the full

system of equations with the PML becomes

(Mω2 + K + Mσ2 − 2iMσ)uscat = − (Mω2 + K)uinc

(A4)

σ is a diagonal matrix of damping coefficients for each degree of freedom. The value of

σ can be chosen with considerable freedom, and need not be homogeneous. We use an

inhomogeneous σ , whose value for atoms inside the PMLD is given by

σ =

σmaxri2
L2

P M L

δij

(A5)

where σmax is the maximum value of the damping coefficient, LP M L is the total length
of the PML layer and the term ri represents the shortest distance of the ith atom from

PD-PMLD boundary. For atoms inside the PD the damping coefficient is simply set to

zero. Here we have chosen a parabolic distribution of the damping coefficient and a more

comprehensive study for obtaining the PML parameters (σmax, LP M L) is given in Kakodkar

et al.27. The following empirical relations were used throughout this manuscript to set the

PML parameters and were found to result in artificial PML energy reflection coefficients of

18

order 10−5.

α1 = Aα3 + B,

α2 = 15(cos2 θ + 0.5)

(A6)

(A7)

Where α1, α2 and α3 are dimensionless parameters given by α1 = kzLP M L/(2π), α2 =

(σmaxLP M L)/cp and α3 = kza/(2π). Here kz is the wavevector component in the direction
normal to the interface, cp = ω/k is the phase velocity and θ is the angle made by the
incident wave-vector normal to the interface. The values of A and B used for this work are

27.8 and -1.3 respectively

Equation A4 is a sparse, banded linear algebraic equation where the terms on the right

hand side are known. The equation is solved numerically to obtain the scattered wave

solution (uscat). Note that unlike the atomistic Green's function method, one does not need

to store the inverted matrix which typically has order, O(N 2), non-zero elements, where N is

the total number of atoms; for comparison, the initial matrix typically only has order, O(N )

non-zero elements. Thus, iterative solvers enable very large system sizes to be simulated

without a distributed memory architecture.

The total energy leaving the system through the scattered wave is then straightforwardly

obtained. Since all the energy is absorbed by dampers in the PML, the total scattered

energy, Q, is obtained inexpensively by summing the rate of energy absorption for each

damper such that

Q = ω2(cid:88)

i

miσii(uscat

i

)∗ uscat

i

(A8)

∗ jpfeser@udel.edu
1 D. G. Cahill, W. K. Ford, K. E. Goodson, G. D. Mahan, A. Majumdar, H. J. Maris, R. Merlin,

and S. R. Phillpot, Journal of Applied Physics 93, 793 (2003).

2 E. S. Landry and A. J. H. McGaughey, Phys. Rev. B 80, 165304 (2009).

3 K. Gordiz and A. Henry, New Journal of Physics 17, 103002 (2015).

4 K. Saaskilahti, J. Oksanen, J. Tulkki, and S. Volz, Phys. Rev. B 90, 134312 (2014).

19

5 K. Gordiz and A. Henry, Scientific Reports 6, 21319 (2016).

6 K. Gordiz and A. Henry, Journal of Apllied Physics 119, 015101 (2016).

7 P. Reddy, K. Castelino,

and A. Majumdar, Applied Physics Letters 87, 211908 (2005),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.2133890.

8 P. L. Kapitza, Journal of Physics (USSR) 4 (1941).

9 D. A. Young and H. J. Maris, Phys. Rev. B 40, 3685 (1989).

10 H. Zhao

and J. B. Freund,

Journal

of Applied Physics 97,

024903

(2005),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1835565.

11 R. S. Prasher and P. E. Phelan, Journal of Heat Transfer 123, 105 (2000).

12 E. T. Swartz and R. O. Pohl, Applied Physics Letters 51, 2200 (1987).

13 N. Mingo and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B 68, 245406 (2003).

14 J. C. Duda, T. S. English, E. S. Piekos, W. A. Soffa, L. V. Zhigilei, and P. E. Hopkins, Phys.

Rev. B 84, 193301 (2011).

15 M. Shen, W. J. Evans, D. Cahill, and P. Keblinski, Phys. Rev. B 84, 195432 (2011).

16 M. Hu, P. Keblinski, and P. K. Schelling, Phys. Rev. B 79, 104305 (2009).

17 P. K. Schelling, S. R. Phillpot, and P. Keblinski, Journal of Applied Physics 95, 6082 (2004).

18 R. J. Stevens, L. V. Zhigilei, and P. M. Norris, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer

50, 3977 (2007).

19 S. G. Volz and G. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 61, 2651 (2000).

20 P. K. Schelling, S. R. Phillpot, and P. Keblinski, Applied Physics Letters 80, 2484 (2002).

21 N. Zuckerman and J. R. Lukes, Phys. Rev. B 77, 094302 (2008).

22 Z. Tian, K. Esfarjani, and G. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 86, 235304 (2012).

23 C. Shao and H. Bao, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 85, 33 (2015).

24 Y. Zhou, X. Zhang, and M. Hu, Nanoscale 8, 1994 (2016).

25 T. S. English, J. C. Duda, J. L. Smoyer, D. A. Jordan, P. M. Norris, and L. V. Zhigilei, Phys.

Rev. B 85, 035438 (2012).

26 H. Zhao

and J. B. Freund,

Journal

of Applied Physics 105,

013515

(2009),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.3054383.

27 R. R. Kakodkar and J. P. Feser, Journal of Applied Physics 118, 094301 (2015),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4929780.

28 S.-i. Tamura, Y. Tanaka, and H. J. Maris, Phys. Rev. B 60, 2627 (1999).

20

29 R. J. Hardy, I. W. Morrison, and S. Bijanki, Journal of Computational Physics 13, 591 (1973).

30 X. W. Zhou, R. E. Jones, C. J. Kimmer, J. C. Duda, and P. E. Hopkins, Phys. Rev. B 87,

094303 (2013).

31 C. A. Polanco and A. W. Ghosh, Journal of Applied Physics 116, 083503 (2014),

http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4893789.

32 C. A. Polanco, R. Rastgarkafshgarkolaei, J. Zhang, N. Q. Le, P. M. Norris, P. E. Hopkins, and

A. W. Ghosh, Phys. Rev. B 92, 144302 (2015).

33 A. McGaughey and M. Kaviany, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 47, 1783

(2004).

34 J.-P. Berenger, Journal of Computational Physics 114, 185 (1994).

35 W. C. Chew and W. H. Weedon, Microwave and Optical Technology Letters 7, 599 (1994).

36 S. Li, X. Liu, A. Agrawal, and A. C. To, Phys. Rev. B 74, 045418 (2006).

21

