Origami-based tunable truss structures

for non-volatile mechanical memory operation

Hiromi Yasuda1, Tomohiro Tachi2, Mia Lee1, and Jinkyu Yang1

1Department of Aeronautics & Astronautics,

University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-2400, USA

2Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,

University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan

Abstract

Origami has recently received significant interest from the scientific community as a building block

for constructing metamaterials [1–9]. However, the primary focus has been placed on their kinematic ap-

plications, such as deployable space structures [10–12] and sandwich core materials [13], by leveraging

the compactness and auxeticity of planar origami platforms. Here, we present volumetric origami cells

– specifically triangulated cylindrical origami (TCO) [14–20] – with tunable stability and stiffness, and

demonstrate their feasibility as non-volatile mechanical memory storage devices. We show that a pair of

origami cells can develop a double-well potential to store bit information without the need of residual

forces. What makes this origami-based approach more appealing is the realization of two-bit mechanical

memory, in which two pairs of TCO cells are interconnected and one pair acts as a control for the other

pair. Using TCO-based truss structures, we present an experimental demonstration of purely mechanical

one- and two-bit memory storage mechanisms.

6
1
0
2

 
c
e
D
1
1

 

 
 
]
l
l
a
h
-
s
e
m

.
t
a
m
-
d
n
o
c
[
 
 

1
v
2
0
4
5
0

.

2
0
7
1
:
v
i
X
r
a

1

Mechanical memory operations can be highly useful not only to mimic electronic/optical

memory devices, but also to manage the flow of mechanical energy for sound isolation, heat

insulation, and energy harvesting purposes [21–25]. These mechanical devices can be highly

useful in harsh environments, such as space and nuclear power plants, where extreme thermal,

mechanical, and radiation conditions can hinder the operation of electronic devices. The robust-

ness of mechanical systems, together with nanoelectromechanical technologies, has indicated

the possibility and effectiveness of mechanical memory storage and computing devices [26, 27].

In previous studies, however, the operations of mechanical memory devices are mostly limited

to an individual one-bit memory level (few attempts on multi-bit memories, e.g., [28]), and the

possibility of cross-linked operations across the neighboring bits has not been fully explored.

Here, we study how we can realize a two-bit mechanical memory operation by using origami

cells. These origami units can function in a modular way, and they can interact with each other

to demonstrate hierarchical, multi-bit memory operations. For this purpose, tunability of unit

cells plays an important role to enable the coupling and bit-flipping behavior between the adja-

cent cells. We show that origami-based structures provide an excellent platform to manipulate

their tunable mechanical characteristics, such as stability and stiffness, in a controllable manner.

Origami has been a popular building block to construct mechanical metamaterials [1–9]. In

particular, an overconstrained quadrangular mesh origami such as Miura-ori pattern [10] has

been studied extensively because it offers a single degree of freedom (DOF) mechanism of

folding without relying on the elasticity of materials. Such a structure is called rigid foldable

origami, or rigid origami, in which the kinematics of folding governs the behavior of the whole

structure. This can be beneficial for the control of deployable planar structures, such as solar

panels and sails [11, 12].

In this paper, we feature volumetric origami as a building block of tunable metamaterials

that can store information. In contrast to the rigid planar origami, volumetric origami gener-

ally inherits a highly nonlinear elastic behavior, at the sacrifice of small deformation of panels.

2

The coupled behavior of folding and elastic deformation can result in versatile kinematic and

dynamic motions. We here investigate the mechanics of volumetric origami, specifically trian-

gulated cylindrical origami (TCO), which can develop coupled dynamics of axial and rotational

motions during folding (Fig. 1a). Despite its simplicity, we find a rich tunability in this struc-

ture to enable the design of monostable/bistable, zero-stiffness, and bifurcation structures from

one-parameter family of the initial geometry. By assembling multiple origami modules with

designed initial conditions, we demonstrate the feasibility of mechanical memory storage units

with non-volatile, bit-flipping behavior.

The TCO consists of repeating triangular arrays, which are characterized by valley crease

lines (length a) and mountain crease lines (length b) as shown in Fig 1b. Top and bottom surfaces

of the TCO unit cell are n-sided polygons (e.g., n = 5 in Fig. 1) with side length c. Since

the TCO is not a rigid foldable origami, folding/unfolding motions cause the warping of each

facet, which may result in surface fatigue and damage under repeated usage. To overcome this

issue while preserving the key characteristics of the TCO, we replace its surfaces with purely

elastic truss members, which support tension/compression by using linear springs (Fig. 1c; See

Supplementary Movie 1 for the comparison between the paper- and truss-based TCO models).

If we assume that the top and bottom surfaces always share the same rotational axis during

folding/unfolding, we can characterize the shape of the unit cell by defining its height (h),

relative angle between the top and bottom polygons (θ), and radius of the circle circumscribing

the polygon (R). Note that for the sake of mathematical simplicity, θ is defined as an angle

between OB and the perpendicular bisector of AaAb as shown in the top view of Fig 1c. Letting

h0 and θ0 be the initial height and relative angle respectively, we can express deformations of
the structure by axial displacement u = −(h− h0) where compression is defined to be positive,
and rotational angle ϕ = θ − θ0.

In this truss model, two crease lines a and b are intersecting at a vertex of the polygon (e.g.,

B in Fig. 1c). For the fabrication of this truss model, we need to secure space for mechanical

3

joints. Thus, we modify the geometry of the TCO model, such that the two crease lines avoid

intersecting (Fig. 1d). The difference between the original (Fig. 1c) and modified (Fig. 1d)

models is characterized by the correction of the relative angle (θcal in Fig. 1d). By adopting

this modified model, we fabricate, test, and analyze four different types of the TCO structures

in various combinations of h0 and θ0. Figure 1e-h show the graphical illustration of these four

original models (top row) and the digital images of their modified physical prototypes (bottom
row): (h0, θ0) = (90 mm, 46◦), (150 mm, 40◦), (140 mm, 92◦), and (119 mm, 0◦). In these
models, we use R = 90 mm and θcal = 9.7◦. See Methods and Supplementary Information for

more details on the experimental configuration.

To understand the folding behavior of the TCO-based structure, we calculate the total elas-

tic energy (U) stored in the TCO cell as a function of u and ϕ (Methods and Supplementary

Information). The insets of Fig. 2a-d show the surface maps of U for the four models, where

dark colored region indicates the valley of the minimum energy level. This highlighted region

forms a near-curve trajectory in this configuration space, indicating that the TCO-based struc-

ture exhibits a near mechanism of single DOF. Thus, simultaneously compressive and rotational

motions of the TCO will follow this trajectory to satisfy the minimum potential energy princi-

ple (Methods). We can also identify the change of the normalized energy (U/kh2

0 where k is

the elastic constant of the linear truss element) under non-dimensionalized axial compression

(u/h0) by imposing ∂U/∂ϕ = 0 (see Supplementary Information and Supplementary Movie 2

for this uni-axial test). Figure 2a-d shows the energy plots, where solid curves denote analytical

results predicted by the minimum potential energy trajectory in the inset surface maps. The

experimental measurements (dashed curves) corroborate these analytical results.

Comparing the four plots in Fig. 2a-d, we observe remarkably different trends: monostable,
bistable, zero-stiffness, and bifurcation behaviors, respectively. If (h0, θ0) = (90 mm, 46◦), the

structure possesses only one minimum energy state at u = 0 (Fig. 2a). Therefore, the total

energy increases monotonically as the TCO cell is compressed, implying a monostable prop-

4

erty. If (h0, θ0) = (150 mm, 40◦), there exist two local minimum states along the energy valley

as shown in Fig. 2b, indicating bistability. The TCO-based structure can also exhibit zero tan-

gential stiffness, so called zero-stiffness mode, in which the application of axial compression

does not create significant axial force or torque at the initial stage. Therefore, the total energy

increases at an extremely low rate around u = 0 (Fig. 2c). The discrepancy between the an-

alytical and experimental results attributes to the friction of the mechanical joints in the truss

elements. Nonetheless, we observe much smaller stiffness in this model compared to the previ-

ous two cases (0.26% and 0.18% in terms of the linearized initial stiffness compared to those of

the monostable and bistable cases, respectively; see the force-displacement curves in Supple-

mentary Information). We analytically find that this zero-stiffness mode can be obtained when

θ0 = π/2. Interestingly, this mode is independent of k and h0 (mathematical proof in Supple-

mentary Information). This zero-stiffness mode can be potentially useful for impact absorption

applications of origami, while maintaining its reusable and tailorable feature.

Lastly, we observe that the TCO-based truss can experience bifurcation if θ0 = 0 (Fig. 2d).

That is, in the initial stage of the folding, the TCO-based structure is axially compressed without

rotation. However, if it reaches a bifurcation point, there are three branches: one unstable branch

(continuing pure compression without rotation as indicated by arrow 1 in Fig. 2d) and two stable

branches (starting to develop twisting motions in one or the other direction as pointed by arrow

2 in Fig. 2d). The two different trends in the uni-axial testing verify this bifurcation behavior

(Fig. 2d; see Supplementary Information and Supplementary Movie 3 for the specially devised

uni-axial compression setup). Overall, the results from these four prototypes manifest versatile

dynamics of the TCO, which can be controlled simply by altering its initial geometry (i.e., h0

and θ0, more details in Supplementary Information).

Using this TCO-based truss structure as a unit cell, we further investigate the folding mech-

anism of multi-cell structures composed of serially stacked TCO cells. We start with a two-cell
structure that consists of identical monostable TCO units with (h0, θ0) = (90 mm, 46◦). They

5

are linked together by sharing the interfacial polygon (Fig. 3a). Note that the chirality of the

TCO cells is important in the multi-cell architectures. In this two-cell level, we arrange the
cells in the opposite chirality, i.e., (h0, θ0) = (90 mm, ±46◦), such that they collectively show

an interesting coupling motion. To test the dynamics of the combined structure, we fix the right

end of the stacked prototype to the wall and impose precompression uC = 45 mm to the left

end of the system (Fig 3a). Then, the total elastic energy of the system will differ depending on

the rotational angles of the two unit cells, characterized by ϕ1 and ϕ2. Note that these angles

are measured with respect to the initial positions of the left and central polygons, respectively.

The inset of Fig. 3b shows the analytical values of U as a function of ϕ1 and ϕ2, where the

highlighted zone represents the valley of the minimum potential energy. We find that the pair of

TCO cells collectively possess two local minimum states: one with the right cell folded and the

other with the left cell folded (see the graphical illustrations in the inset of Fig. 3b). The normal-

ized elastic energy can be re-plotted as a function of ϕ1 by imposing ∂U/∂ϕ2 = 0. Figure 3b

evidently shows a symmetric double-well potential. This demonstrates that a pair of monostable

TCO cells can successfully form a bistable system, requiring energy to overcome the potential

barrier for the transition between the two stable states. Please note that this potential barrier

can be manipulated by controlling precompression, i.e., tunable potential barrier. Let '1' be the

state where the first unit cell is folded, and '0' be the state where the second unit cell is folded.

Then we can use this system as a TCO-based mechanical memory device, which can store bit

information ('1' or '0') by exploiting the double-well potential. One advantage of this mechan-

ical memory is its non-volatility, implying that it can store bit information stably without the

necessity of external residual force. To change the states from '0' to '1' or vice versa, we con-

trol only ϕ1 so that the two-unit cell system can switch its state (see Supplementary Information

and Supplementary Movie 4 for experimental verification).

Now we demonstrate a two-bit memory operation. We use two pairs of the TCO cells, i.e.,

four identical units of the TCO-based truss elements (h0 = 90 mm) in the sequence of θ0 =

6

[46◦, – 46◦, 46◦, – 46◦]. Similar to the previous setup for the single bit operation, we fix the

rightmost polygon to the wall in both translational and rotational directions, while we let the

other polygons rotate freely. We apply precompression of uC = 50 mm and 47.5 mm to the

first and second pairs respectively, such that the two pairs maintain the specified compressed

states throughout the operation. Here, we intentionally introduce distinctive uC values to break

symmetry, thereby inducing controlled coupling behavior between the two bits. (further details

to be explained later). We first analyze the total elastic energy of the system in relation to the

deformed status of the two single-bit memory units. We represent the deformation of these

two pairs by measuring the rotational angles ϕ1 and ϕ3, which represent the twisted angles of

the first and third polygons respectively with respect to their uncompressed positions (Fig. 4a).

The analytical results are shown in Fig. 4b, where we identify four minimum energy states

representing '00', '01', '10', and '11'. Here the first and second numbers indicate the first bit

(left pair denoted in blue color in the inset of Fig. 4b) and second bit (right pair in red color)

bit, respectively. For example, '10' is the state where the first bit shows '1', and the second bit

shows '0', following the definition of on and off status from the memory operation as illustrated

in Fig. 3b.

The next step is to test the operation of the two-bit memory. Unlike operations of conven-

tional memories (i.e., manipulation of each bit one by one), we demonstrate a unique operation

of the two-bit memory by utilizing controlled coupling behavior between the two bits. In par-

ticular, this operation flips the second bit if the first bit is '1', which indicates that the first bit

can control the state of the second bit. In this process, however, the second bit does not affect

the state of the first bit, thus exhibiting a one-directional coupling mechanism. We demonstrate

this operation by applying a pulse input to the first bit and measuring the response from the

second bit. For this, we impose a trapezoid-shaped waveform on ϕ1 to alternates the condition

of the first bit between '1' and '0' (Supplementary Information). The key point here is to verify

that the onset of the control pulse (i.e., '1') can flip the information stored in the second bit.

7

This process can be represented by the following two cases: '00' → '11' and '01' → '10'. The

former corresponds to the conversion of the second bit from off to on (i.e, '0' to '1'), while the

latter implies the opposite case that the second bit changes from on to off (i.e, '1' to '0') as the

first bit is turned on.

We start with demonstrating the first case ('00' → '11'). Figure 4c illustrates the conceptual

chart of the sequential operation of ϕ1 and the consequential change of ϕ3. The corresponding

evolution of the TCO pairs' states is plotted in Fig. 4d, where the red curve denotes the experi-

mental result of ϕ1 and ϕ3 measured by non-contact laser Doppler vibrometry (Supplementary

Information). The system is initially positioned at '00', as denoted by the state at (i) in Figs. 4c-
d. As we apply the pulse input to the first bit (i.e., ϕ1 = −62◦ to 62◦), the first bit changes its

state from '0' to '1' in the beginning of the operation. See the transition of red curve from point

(i) to point (ii) in Fig. 4d. This onset of the first bit eventually flips the second bit from '0' to
'1' (i.e., ϕ3 = −31◦ to 28◦, see the state (iii) in Fig. 4d and Supplementary Movie 5). Thus,

we verify the transition from the initial state '00' to the final state '11' without resorting to any

direct excitations applied to the second bit.

Next, we move on to demonstrate the second case of the two-bit memory operation ('01' →

'10'). Since the previous operation started from '00', we need to first perform input preparation

to change the initial state from '00' to '01'. For this, we apply the pulse input directly to the

second bit to convert it from '0' to '1'. This pulse input to the second bit does not affect the first

bit, because ϕ1 is not constrained. Therefore, ϕ1 and ϕ3 rotate in the same direction at the same

rate without flipping the status of the first bit (see the input preparation process in Fig. 4e). Now

we apply the pulse input to the first bit, which manipulates the first bit from '0' to '1' as shown

by the trajectory of the red curve from the state (i) to the top right corner (ii). Sequentially, the

energy state moves from the state (ii) to the state (iii), flipping the second bit from '1' to '0'.

Since distinctive uC values are applied to the first and second bits, the energy slope from '11' to

'10' is less than that from '11' to '01'. Therefore, we observe that the state changes from '11'

8

to '10' instead of '11' to '01'. This serial process eventually changes the combined states of

the first and second bits from '01' to '10', successfully verifying the second case of the two-bit

memory operation (Supplementary Information and Supplementary Movie 6).

Although we showed the versatile nature and potential of the TCO elements hierarchically

from a single-cell, double-cell, up to four-cell levels in one dimension, we envision that it

can be further extended to multi-dimensions, e.g., honey-comb like 3D clusters. This will

function as a layer of mechanical memory storage and computing structures, which can also

provide multi-functional features, such as rugged protective layers. Likewise, while this study

explored only serial connections of origami cells, they can be also connected in parallel or

coaxially, to achieve various functionalities. Moreover, origami can be scaled to miniaturized

dimensions. The versatile nature of the TCO together with nanoelectromechanical systems

(NEMS) has great potential to develop robust NEMS actuators and sensing devices. Also,

the intrinsic nature of the TCO cells that interweave axial and torsional motions can be further

exploited for dynamic purposes. Conclusively, the volumetric origami cells can pave a new way

for designing novel engineering systems for mechanical computing and other purposes relying

on their rich constitutive mechanics in a single-cell level and strong cohesion in a multi-cell

level.

Methods

Principle of minimum total potential energy approach. By using the geometry of the

TCO-based unit cell, we calculate the length of crease lines a and b (see Fig 1(c)) as follows:

(cid:115)
(cid:115)

a =

b =

(h0 − u)2 + 4R(cid:48)2sin2

(h0 − u)2 + 4R(cid:48)2sin2

(cid:18) ϕ
(cid:18) ϕ

2

+

+

θ0
2

θ0
2

− π
2n

+ θcal

+

π
2n

− θcal

2

(cid:19)
(cid:19)

(1)

where R(cid:48) and θcal are a modified radius of the circle circumscribing the cross-section and a cal-

ibrated angle to compensate for the difference between original and physical prototype models

9

as U = 1

(Please see Supplementary Information for details). Then, the total elastic energy is calculated
2nk(b − b0)2 where a0 and b0 are initial length of a and b, and k is a
spring constant of the truss members. Also, the work is obtained by W = F u + T ϕ where F

2nk(a − a0)2 + 1

and T are the external force and torque applied to the TCO cell, respectively. Based on these

expressions, the total potential energy (Π) is

Π(u, ϕ) = U − W =

nK(a − a0)2 +

1
2

1
2

nK(b − b0)2 − F u − T ϕ

(2)

By applying the principle of minimum total potential energy (i.e., ∂Π/∂u = 0 and ∂Π/∂ϕ = 0),

we obtain the analytical expressions of the two-DOF folding/unfolding motion of the TCO-

based structure (Supplementary Information).

Prototype fabrication and compression test. We use acrylic plates tailored by a laser cutter

for the top and bottom polygons, and 3D printed parts made of polylactic acid for universal

joints to attach truss elements to the polygons. Stainless steel shafts (diameter is 3.18 mm) and

linear springs (k = 3.32 kN/m for monostable, bistable, zero-stiffness models; k = 1.08 kN/m

for bifurcation model) are used to form truss elements that support tension/compression. To

obtain the mechanical properties of the prototypes, we build a customized testing setup where

the prototype is placed horizontally and its bottom surface is mounted on a fixed wall. The top

surface is supported by a ball bearing and stainless steel shaft, so that it can translate and rotate

with minimal friction (Supplementary Information and Supplemental Movies 2–6).

Acknowledgments

We thank Mike Clark at CoMotion at the University of Washington for technical support.

We also thank Hansuek Lee at KAIST and Hyochul Kim at Samsung Advanced Institute of

Technology in Korea for helpful discussions. We are grateful for the support from the ONR

(N000141410388) and NSF (CAREER-1553202).

10

Author contributions

H.Y. and M.L. conducted the research and interpreted the results, and J.Y. and T.T. provided

guidance throughout the research. H.Y., T.T., and J.Y. prepared the manuscript.

Additional information

The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests. Correspondence and

requests for materials should be addressed to Jinkyu Yang (email: jkyang@aa.washington.edu).

[1] Hawkes, E. et al. Programmable matter by folding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 12441

(2010).

[2] Schenk, M. & Guest, S. D. Geometry of Miura-folded metamaterials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110,

3276–3281 (2013).

[3] Lv, C., Krishnaraju, D., Konjevod, G., Yu, H. & Jiang, H. Origami based mechanical metamaterials.

Sci. Rep. 4, 5979 (2014).

[4] Cheung K., Tachi T., Calisch S. & Miura K. Origami Interleaved Tube Cellular Materials Smart

Materials and Structures 23 (2014)

[5] Yasuda, H. & Yang, J. Reentrant Origami-Based Metamaterials with Negative Poissons Ratio and

Bistability. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 185502 (2015).

[6] Waitukaitis, S., Menaut, R., Chen, B. G. & van Hecke, M. Origami Multistability: From Single

Vertices to Metasheets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 055503 (2015).

[7] Silverberg, J. L. et al. Origami structures with a critical transition to bistability arising from hidden

degrees of freedom. Nat. Mater. 14, 389–393 (2015).

[8] Filipov, E. T., Tachi, T. & Paulino, G. H. Origami tubes assembled into stiff, yet reconfigurable

structures and metamaterials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 12321–12326 (2015).

11

[9] Overvelde, J. T. B. et al. A three-dimensional actuated origami-inspired transformable metamaterial

with multiple degrees of freedom. Nat. Commun 7, 10929 (2016).

[10] Miura, K. Method of packaging and deployment of large membranes in space Report No.618 (In-

stitute of Space and Astronautical Science, 1985).

[11] Tsuda, Y. et al. Flight Status of IKAROS Deep Space Solar Sail Demonstrator. Acta Astronaut 69,

833–840 (2011).

[12] Zirbel, S. A. et al. Accommodating Thickness in Origami-Based Deployable Arrays. J. Mech. Des.

135 (2013).

[13] Schenk, M., Guest, S. D., & McShane, G. J. Novel Stacked Folded Cores for Blast-resistant Sand-

wich Beams. Int. J. Solids Struct. 51, 4196–4214 (2014).

[14] Miura, K. Proposition of pseudo-cylindrical concave polyhedral shells. in Proceedings of IASS

Symposium on Folded Plates and Prismatic Structures 141–163 (1970).

[15] Kresling, B. Plant Design: Mechanical Simulations of Growth Pat- terns and Bionics. Biomimetics

3, 105–122 (1995).

[16] Zhao, X., Yabo H., & Hagiwara, I. Optimal design for crash characteristics of cylindrical thin-

walled structure using origami engineering. Transactions of The Japan Society of Mechanical En-

gineers Series A 76, 10–17 (2010).

[17] Jianguo, C., Xiaowei, D., Ya, Z., Jian, F., & Yongming, T. Bistable Behavior of the Cylindrical

Origami Structure With Kresling Pattern. J. Mech. Des. 137, 061406 (2015).

[18] Hunt, G. W. & Ario, I. Twist buckling and the foldable cylinder: an exercise in origami. Int. J. Non.

Linear. Mech. 40, 833–843 (2005).

[19] Guest, S. D. & Pellegrino, S. The folding of triangulated cylinders, Part I: Geometric considera-

tions. J. Appl. Mech. 61, 773–777 (1994).

[20] Ishida, S., Uchida, H., & Hagiwara I. Vibration isolators using nonlinear spring characteristics of

origami-based foldable structures. Trans. JSME (in Japanese) 80, DR0384 (2014)

12

[21] Li, N., Ren, J., Wang, L., Zhang, G., Hanggi, P., & Li, B. Phononics: Manipulating heat flow with

electronic analogs and beyond. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1045–1066 (2012).

[22] Liang, B., Guo, X. S., Tu, J., Zhang, D. & Cheng, J. C. An acoustic rectifier. Nat. Mater. 9, 989–992

(2010).

[23] Maldovan, M. Sound and heat revolutions in phononics. Nature, 503, 209–217 (2013).

[24] Cummer, S. A. Selecting the direction of sound transmission. Science 343, 495–496 (2014).

[25] Fleury, R., Sounas, D. L., Sieck, C. F., Haberman, M. R., & Al, A. Sound Isolation and Giant

Linear Nonreciprocity in a Compact Acoustic Circulator. Science 343, 516–519 (2014).

[26] Pott, V., Kam, H., Nathanael, R., Jeon, J., Alon, E., & Liu, T. J. K. Mechanical computing redux:

Relays for integrated circuit applications. Proceedings of the IEEE 98, 2076–2094 (2010).

[27] Lee, T., Bhunia, S., & Mehregany, M. Electromechanical computing at 500◦C with silicon carbide.

Science 329, 1316–1318 (2010).

[28] Guo, A., Fu, Y., Wang, C., Guan, L., Liu, J., Shi, Z., Gu, Z., Huang, R., & Zhang, X. Two-bit mem-

ory devices based on single-wall carbon nanotubes: demonstration and mechanism. Nanotechnol-

ogy 18, 125206 (2007).

13

FIG. 1: Geometry of triangulated cylindrical origami. a, Folding motion of the TCO. b, The flat

sheet with crease patterns consisting of mountain crease lines (a shown as blue solid lines) and valley

crease lines (b shown as red dashed lines). c, Truss version of the TCO, where all facets are removed

and crease lines are replaced by linear springs with a spring constant of k. d, Modified truss structure for

the fabrication of physical prototypes. e-h, Graphical illustrations of four different TCO configurations

(upper row) and digital images of their physical prototypes (lower row). Their initial configurations are

(h0, θ0) = (90 mm, 46◦), (150 mm, 40◦), (140 mm, 92◦), and (119 mm, 0◦) from left to right.

14

FIG. 2: Folding motions of the TCO cells. (a-d), The energy analysis for the TCO-based truss structures

shows remarkably different behaviors: a, Monostability at (h0, θ0) = (90 mm, 46◦); b, bistability at
(150 mm, 40◦); c, zero-stiffness mode at (140 mm, 92◦); and d, bifurcation at (119 mm, 0◦). The

displacement is normalized by h0, and energy is normalized by kh2

0. Experimental results (mean value

is shown as dashed curves, and standard deviation is represented by colored areas) show qualitative

agreements with the analytical predictions (solid curves). The inset plots show the equi-potential plots

of U/kh2

0 as a function of u/h0 and ϕ, in which highlighted trajectories indicate the valley of minimum

potential energy. In the experimental curves, the range of u/h0 is restricted by the folding motions of the

TCO-based truss prototypes. For example, the highly twisted shape of the zero-stiffness TCO prototype
(Fig. 1g) causes the truss elements overlap in the early stage of folding, allowing only ∼15% of u/h0 as

shown in the panel c. The moderately twisted geometry of the monostable and bistable cases (Figs. 1e

and f) permit more compression, allowing approximately 50% folding of the truss structure in terms of

u/h0 as shown in the panels a and b.

15

FIG. 3: A pair of TCO cells' capability to demonstrate mechanical memory storage. a, Two

monostable TCO-based unit cells are connected horizontally. We fix the distance between leftmost and

rightmost polygons by imposing a constant distance between them. Photograph of the corresponding

configuration is shown in the right panel. b, The normalized elastic energy as a function of ϕ1 shows the

double-well potential numerically. The inset shows the surface map of the elastic energy as a function

of both ϕ1 and ϕ2, where the highlighted region denotes the valley of the map corresponding to the

minimum potential energy trajectory. There exist two minimum states, and the illustrations show the

schematic shapes of the pair of TCO cells at these points. Here, the configuration of the folded right cell

represents '0', while the one with the folded right cell denotes '1'.

16

FIG. 4: Two pairs of TCO cells' to demonstrate two-bit memory operation. a, Two-bit memory
is composed of four TCO-based unit cells as shown in a schematic illustration (left) and photograph
(right). The first two units from the left (i.e., left pair in blue color) form a first bit, and the other two
unit cells (i.e., right pair in red color) form a second bit. The states of these two bits are determined by
the rotational angles of the first and third unit cells, ϕ1 and ϕ3. b, The potential energy of the system
as a function of ϕ1 and ϕ3 is analyzed, where a darker region represents a lower level of the normalized
potential energy (color map). We divide the ϕ1 and ϕ3 space into four regions: '00', '01', '10', and '11'.
Inset illustrations indicate a representative shape of the TCO cells for each region. c, The sequence of
the operation for '00' → '11' is shown. A pulse input is applied only to the first bit. d Experimental
result in a red curve indicates that the operation flips the second bit from '0' to '1'. e, The sequence
of the operation for '01' → '10' is shown. A pulse input is applied to the second bit first for the input
preparation, and then to the first bit for the operation. f Experimental result indicates that the operation
flips the second bit from '1' to '0'.

17

