a

Magnetoresistance in an electronic cavity coupled to
one-dimensional systems

Chengyu Yan,1, 2, a) Sanjeev Kumar,1, 2 Patrick See,3 Ian Farrer,4, b) David Ritchie,4 J.
P. Griffiths,4 G. A. C. Jones,4 and Michael Pepper1, 2
1)London Centre for Nanotechnology, 17-19 Gordon Street, London WC1H 0AH,
United Kingdom
2)Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London,
Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, United Kingdom
3)National Physical Laboratory, Hampton Road, Teddington, Middlesex TW11 0LW,
United Kingdom
4)Cavendish Laboratory, J.J. Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 OHE,
United Kingdom

(Dated: 3 August 2021)

In the present work we performed magnetoresistance measurement in a hybrid
system consisting of an arc-shaped quantum point contact (QPC) and a flat, rect-
angular QPC, both of which together form an electronic cavity between them. The
results highlight a transition between collimation-induced resistance dip to a mag-
netoresistance peak as the strength of coupling between the QPC and the electronic
cavity was increased. The initial results show the promise of hybrid quantum sys-
tem for future quantum technologies.

Recent development in quantum technologies has stimulated research activities in inte-
grating different quantum components in order to realize complex functionality1,2.
It is
therefore of fundamental interest to investigate coupling between discrete quantum devices.
Coupling between electronic cavity and other quantum devices, such as quantum point
contact3 -- 7 (QPC) and quantum dot8 -- 10 (QD), has attracted considerable attention. A hy-
brid device consisting of a QPC and an electronic cavity, as an example, provides a unique
platform to investigate electronic equivalent of optical phenomena. This may be understood
from the fact that electrons in such a system transport ballistically and accumulate phase
along the quasi-classical trajectories, which is a close analogue of an optical cavity. Previous
studies based on QPC-cavity hybrid devices reported results based on classical trajectories
of electrons3,4,11,12 as well as quantum effects manifested as conductance fluctuations3,4 and
Ahronov-Bohm phase shift as a function of cavity size4.

In the present work, we studied magnetoresistance in a hybrid system in a controlled
manner with the assistance of two QPCs which form an electronic cavity between them.
We show the strength of coupling between the QPC and cavity states can be monitored by
oscillation in the magnitude of central peak/dip in magnetoresistance.

The devices studied in the work were fabricated from a high mobility two-dimensional
electron gas (2DEG) formed at the interface of GaAs/Al0.33Ga0.67As heterostructure. The
measured electron density (mobility) was 1.80×1011cm−2 (2.17×106cm2V−1s−1) at 1.5 K,
which ensured that both the calculated mean free path and phase coherence length13,14
were over 10 µm which were larger than electron propagation length. The experiments
were performed in a cryofree dilution refrigerator with a lattice temperature of 20 mK
using the standard lockin technique.

The hybrid device consists of a pair of arc-shaped gates with a QPC (referred as arc-
QPC) forming in the center of arc-gates and another pair of rectangular QPC (named as
flat-QPC) as depicted in Fig. 1. The QPCs are assembled in such a way that the geometrical
center of the arc (shaped gates) aligns with the saddle point of the flat-QPC. An electronic
cavity is formed when QPCs are activated by depleting the 2D electrons underneath the

a)Electronic mail: uceeya3@ucl.ac.uk
b)Currently at Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Sheffield, Mappin Street,
Sheffield S1 3JD, United Kingdom.

2

FIG. 1. The experiment setup and device characteristics. The blue trace shows the characteristic
of arc-QPC as a function of gate voltage Vsg1; the red trace illustrates the behaviour of flat-QPC
against gate voltage Vsg2. The series resistance was not removed. Inset depicts an illustration of
the experiment setup, the yellow blocks represent electron-beam lithographically defined metallic
gates while the red squares highlight the Ohmic contact. The length (width) of the flat-QPC is
700 nm (500 nm). The radius of the arc is 2 µm with an opening angle of 45◦. Both the length
and width of the QPC formed in the center of the arc, i.e arc-QPC, are 200 nm.

FIG. 2. Magnetoresistance of the hybrid system with flat-QPC as an emitter. The flat-QPC
conductance was incremented while arc-QPC was fixed at G0 (G0 = 2e2
h ). (a) Result in regime 1
(G0 to 4G0), the central dip gradually evolved into a peak with increasing flat-QPC conductance.
(b) Result in regime 2 (4G0 to 6G0), the central peak is present in this regime. The black arrows
highlight the satellite peaks. (c) Result in regime 3 (6G0 to channel fully open), the central peak
split into two peaks in the 1D-2D transition regime and eventually all features are smeared out.
The strength of the central feature is defined as such ∆R = RM -(RL+RR)/2, where RM , RL and
RR refer to the resistance measured at given magnetic field marked by the vertical dashed lines.

gates5,6. Both the arc-QPC and flat-QPC showed well defined one-dimensional conductance
quantization when they were characterised individually, Fig. 1.

In the presence of a small transverse magnetic field, the magnetoresistance of flat-QPC or
arc-QPC exhibited a weak-localization peak similar to reported previously15,16. However,
the non-trivial features started appearing when the hybrid device was formed, i.e. both
flat-QPC and arc-QPC were activated.

In the first experiment, the flat-QPC served as an emitter while the arc-QPC was used
as a collector, see inset of Fig. 1. The voltage applied to the flat-QPC was incremented

3

FIG. 3. Magnetoresistance of the hybrid system with arc-QPC as an emitter. The arc-QPC
conductance was incremented while flat-QPC was fixed at G0. (a)-(c) show results in all the three
regimes, regime 1 (G0 to 4G0), regime 2 (4G0 to 7G0), and regime 3 (7G0-channel fully open),
respectively. It was seen that the central dip dominated the spectrum.

slowly corresponding to a conductance of G0 (G0= 2e2
h ) up to 1D channel fully open while
the arc-QPC was fixed at G0. The magnetoresistance was investigated in three different
regimes according to flat-QPC conductance.

In regime 1, the flat-QPC was incremented from G0 to 4G0, Fig. 2(a). A dip in resistance
(marked by the magenta dashed line) was observed around 0 T when the flat-QPC conduc-
tance G (cid:54) 2G0 which is due to the fact that the injected electrons had a relatively small
angular spread owing to strong collimation in low conductance regime17,18. The electrons
tend to propagate from the flat-QPC through the arc-QPC directly without backscattering;
however, the applied magnetic field guides the injected electrons to the arc-shaped bound-
ary wall of the arc-QPC and thus results in backscattering, which in turn triggers a rise
in resistance. In this respect, our hybrid system is similar to a long quantum wire where
scattering at the boundary was suggested to introduce a central dip in magnetoresistance19.
An offset in central dip in magnetoresistance of 3 mT could be due to magnetic hysteresis
of the superconducting magnet. On increasing G to 4G0, a central magnetoresistance peak
started forming. The zero-field magnetoresistance peak in electronic billiards is a result of
geometry induced closed loop20 (in other words, an analogue to weak localization). A large
angular spread at higher G makes injected electrons to be reflected at the boundary wall of
the arc-shaped QPCs, thus forming a close loop even at zero magnetic field; on the hand, a
relatively small angular spread at low conductance makes such reflection unlikely to happen
without the assistance of a magnetic field. The backscattered electrons will be refocused to
the saddle point of flat-QPC.

In regime 2, Fig. 2(b), the flat-QPC was set from 4G0 to 6G0, the magnitude of the central
peak fluctuated in the sense that the central peak gradually smeared out when the flat-QPC
conductance was close to 5G0, and then reappeared on further increasing the conductance of
flat-QPC. The fluctuation will be discussed in detail in Fig. 5. Meanwhile it was also noticed
that multiple weak-satellite peaks, marked by black arrows in Fig. 2(b), occurred in this
regime. It was suggested4 in a previous work that the appearance of these satellite peaks
was an indication of Aharonov-Bohm effect and each peak was associated with a particular
classical orbit. We suggest that although the satellite peaks might be relevant with classical
orbits, however, Aharonov-Bohm effect did not occur in our experiment considering the fact
that the satellites peaks were almost absent in regime 1 or regime 3.

In regime 3 (6G0 to fully open emitter), Fig. 2(c), the central peak gradually splits into two
peaks around the 1D-2D transition regime of the flat-QPC and eventually all the features

4

FIG. 4. Representative electron trajectories with flat-QPC and arc-QPC acting as emitter, respec-
tively. The solid traces represent the trajectory of incident electrons whereas the dashed traces
illustrate the reflected electrons. In plot (a), the solid and dashed traces are offset intentionally for
clarity, which otherwise should overlap together. The thick black arrows indicate current injection
direction.

smeared out and only a smooth background was observed with the flat-QPC entering into
the 2D regime. The smooth background agrees well the weak-localization signal when the
arc-QPC was characterised individually.
when the magnetic field exceeded ±0.13 T (data is not shown).

To be noted that Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation started appearing in all the three regimes

To ensure the observation did not simply arise from the superposition of the magneto-
spectrum of two individual QPCs, we reversed the role of emitter and collector. In setup
II the arc-QPC was utilized as an emitter and incremented while the flat-QPC functioned
as a collector and was fixed at G0.
In addition, the ac signal is fed to the left Ohmic
[Fig. 1(a)] whereas the right Ohmic is grounded in setup II.The results are summarized in
Fig. 3. Results in regime 1, Fig. 3(a), was similar to that observed with setup I. However,
the central dip dominated in regime 2 [Fig. 3(b)] and 3 [Fig. 3(c)] which was considerably
different from its counterpart in Fig. 2 where more features were resolved. The behaviour in
setup II was similar to the magnetoresistance in two regular QPC in series18. It is interesting
to mention that satellite peaks observed in Fig. 2(b) did not occur in setup II. A comparison
between setup I and II also suggests that the complicated evolution of magnetoresistance
observed in Fig. 2 did not directly arise from the form of wavefunction at different emitter
conductance; otherwise, setup II should exhibit similar behaviour.

The difference between the results from two setup could be understood with a semi-
classical picture as shown in Fig. 4. Electrons injected from the flat-QPC, which aligns with
the geometrical centre of the arc (i.e. arc-QPC), experience an arc-shaped reflector which
traps the electrons in an electronic cavity defined by these QPCs. The injected electrons
after reflection at the boundary wall of the arc would be directed towards the flat-QPC.
Owing to the geometry of cavity defined between the arc- and flat-QPCs, electrons would be
trapped in a closed loop such as events 1→4 as shown in Fig. 4(a) until the total propagation
length exceeded the mean free path; phase associated with such a close loop is unlikely to
be averaged out, therefore corrections to the resistance, i.e. the central magnetoresistance
peak, due to the accumulated phase was observable. On the other hand, the trajectory of
electrons injected from the arc-QPC, i.e. setup II, did not necessarily form a closed loop,
so that it was relatively easy for the injected electrons to get through the hybrid system
via a series of scattering events, for instance events 1→3 as depicted in Fig. 4(b). Electron
trajectory in the second scenario is more arbitrary and the trajectory-determined phase
tends to be averaged out, which leads to no obvious corrections in the resistance.

After addressing the difference between the two setup, we discuss a possible mechanism
behind the observed fluctuation of the central features with flat-QPC serving as an emitter.
To quantify the fluctuation, we defined the strength of the central feature (could be dip
or peak) as such ∆R = RM -(RL+RR)/2, where RM , RL and RR refer to the resistance
measured at given magnetic field marked in Fig. 2 (although in dip dominant regime there
was not noticeble feature at L or R, we still use the resistance at the same field for systematic
investigation). It was seen that ∆R followed a quasi-periodic oscillation3 -- 6,21 when the flat-
QPC was tuned into the 1D regime (Vsg (cid:54) -0.25 V); the fluctuation smeared out when the
flat-QPC entered the 2D regime as shown in Fig. 5. The fact that the peak of oscillation

5

FIG. 5. Fluctuation of the central feature as a function of flat-QPC conductance. The relative
strength of the central feature, ∆R = RM -(RL+RR)/2, shows quasi-periodic oscillation, where
RM , RL and RR refer to resistance at the given magnetic field marked in Fig. 2.

does not necessarily occur at each conductance plateau suggesting that it is not simply
associated with occupation of 1D subband or electron collimation, which would otherwise
produce peaks corresponding to each conductance plateau. Instead, the oscillation was an
indication of the coupling between the cavity and QPC sates. Each peak in Fig. 5 is a
result of removing a cavity mode, therefore peaks in ∆R should occur when the change in
radius r of cavity matched a condition3, ∆r = N×λF /2, where N is an integer and λF is
the Fermi wavelength.

In conclusion we have shown magnetoresistance in a hybrid system consisting of QPCs
coupled via an electronic cavity. It was found that the central magneto-feature around 0 T
underwent a transition from dip into peak when the cavity was present whereas resistance
dip dominated when the cavity was effectively absent. An oscillation of the strength of
the central magneto-feature was observed as a consequence of coupling between the QPC
and cavity sates. The results provide insight of coupling between discrete quantum devices
which is valuable for further development of integrated quantum systems.

The work is funded by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC),

United Kingdom.

1Y. Hu, H. O. Churchill, D. J. Reilly, J. Xiang, C. M. Lieber, and C. M. Marcus, "A Ge/Si heterostructure
nanowire-based double quantum dot with integrated charge sensor," Nature nanotechnology 2, 622 -- 625
(2007).
2J. Majer, J. Chow, J. Gambetta, J. Koch, B. Johnson, J. Schreier, L. Frunzio, D. Schuster, A. Houck,
A. Wallraff, et al., "Coupling superconducting qubits via a cavity bus." Nature 449, 443 -- 447 (2007).
3J. A. Katine, M. A. Eriksson, A. S. Adourian, R. M. Westervelt, J. D. Edwards, A. Lupu-Sax, E. J.
Heller, K. L. Campman, and A. C. Gossard, "Point contact conductance of an open resonator," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 79, 4806 -- 4809 (1997).
4D. S. Duncan, M. A. Topinka, R. M. Westervelt, K. D. Maranowski, and A. C. Gossard, "Aharonov-bohm
phase shift in an open electron resonator," Phys. Rev. B 64, 033310 (2001).
5C. Yan, S. Kumar, M. Pepper, P. See, I. Farrer, D. Ritchie, J. Griffiths, and G. Jones, "Fano resonance
in a cavity-reflector hybrid system," Phys. Rev. B 95, 041407 (2017).
6C. Yan, S. Kumar, M. Pepper, P. See, I. Farrer, D. Ritchie, J. Griffiths, and G. Jones, "Interference
effects in a tunable quantum point contact integrated with an electronic cavity," Phys. Rev. Applied 8,
024009 (2017).
7R. Steinacher, C. Poltl, T. Krahenmann, A. Hofmann, C. Reichl, W. Zwerger, W. Wegscheider, R. Jal-
abert, K. Ensslin, D. Weinmann, et al., "Scanning gate experiments: from strongly to weakly invasive
probes," arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.08559 (2017).
8C. Rossler, D. Oehri, O. Zilberberg, G. Blatter, M. Karalic, J. Pijnenburg, A. Hofmann, T. Ihn, K. Ensslin,
C. Reichl, and W. Wegscheider, "Transport spectroscopy of a spin-coherent dot-cavity system," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 115, 166603 (2015).
9L. G. G. V. Dias da Silva, C. H. Lewenkopf, E. Vernek, G. J. Ferreira, and S. E. Ulloa, "Conductance
and kondo interference beyond proportional coupling," Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 116801 (2017).

10M. S. Ferguson, D. Oehri, C. Rossler, T. Ihn, K. Ensslin, G. Blatter, and O. Zilberberg, "Long-range
spin coherence in a strongly coupled all-electronic dot-cavity system," Phys. Rev. B 96, 235431 (2017).

6

11J. S. Hersch, M. R. Haggerty, and E. J. Heller, "Diffractive orbits in an open microwave billiard," Phys.

Rev. Lett. 83, 5342 -- 5345 (1999).

12J. S. Hersch, M. R. Haggerty, and E. J. Heller, "Influence of diffraction on the spectrum and wave

functions of an open system," Phys. Rev. E 62, 4873 -- 4888 (2000).

13B. L. Altshuler, A. Aronov, and D. Khmelnitsky, "Effects of electron-electron collisions with small energy

transfers on quantum localisation," Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15, 7367 (1982).

14D. M. Pooke, N. Paquin, M. Pepper,

and A. Gundlach, "Electron-electron scattering in narrow Si

accumulation layers," Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 1, 3289 (1989).

15B. Reulet, H. Bouchiat, and D. Mailly, "Magnetoconductance, weak localization and electron-electron

interactions in semi-ballistic quantum wires," EPL (Europhysics Letters) 31, 305 (1995).

16S. J. Koester, K. Ismail, K. Y. Lee, and J. O. Chu, "Weak localization in back-gated Si/Si0.7Ge0.3

quantum-well wires fabricated by reactive ion etching," Phys. Rev. B 54, 10604 -- 10608 (1996).

17L. W. Molenkamp, A. A. M. Staring, C. W. J. Beenakker, R. Eppenga, C. E. Timmering, J. G. Williamson,
C. J. P. M. Harmans, and C. T. Foxon, "Electron-beam collimation with a quantum point contact," Phys.
Rev. B 41, 1274 -- 1277 (1990).

18A. S. D. Heindrichs, H. Buhmann, S. F. Godijn, and L. W. Molenkamp, "Classical rebound trajectories

in nonlocal ballistic electron transport," Phys. Rev. B 57, 3961 -- 3965 (1998).

19T. J. Thornton, M. L. Roukes, A. Scherer, and B. P. Van de Gaag, "Boundary scattering in quantum

wires," Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2128 -- 2131 (1989).

20M. Berry, J. Katine, C. Marcus, R. Westervelt, and A. Gossard, "Weak localization and conductance

fluctuations in a chaotic quantum dot," Surface science 305, 495 -- 500 (1994).

21M. Saito, T. Usuki, M. Okada, T. Futatsugi, R. Kiehl, and N. Yokoyama, "Coupling between one-
dimensional states in a quantum point contact and an electron waveguide," Applied physics letters 65,
3087 -- 3089 (1994).

