
Correlation of Vibrational Excitations and Electronic Structure

with Submolecular Resolution

Daniela Rolf,1 Friedrich Maass,2 Christian Lotze,1 Constantin Czekelius,3

Benjamin W. Heinrich,1 Petra Tegeder,2 and Katharina J. Franke1
1Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universitat Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany

2Physikalisch-Chemisches Institut, Universitat Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

3Institut fur Organische Chemie und Makromolekulare Chemie,

Heinrich-Heine-Universitat Dusseldorf, 40225 Dusseldorf, Germany

The detection of vibrational excitations of individual molecules on surfaces by scanning tunneling
spectroscopy does not obey strict selection rules but rather propensity rules. The experimental ver-
ification of these is challenging because it requires the independent variation of specific parameters,
such as the electronic structure, while keeping the vibrational modes the same. Here, we make use of
the versatile self-assembled structures of Fe-tetra-pyridyl-porphyrin molecules on a Au(111) surface.
These exhibit different energy-level alignments of the frontier molecular orbitals, thus allowing the
correlation of electronic structure and detection of vibrations. We identify up to seven vibrational
modes in the tunneling spectra of the molecules in some of the arrangements, whereas we observe
none in other structures. We find that the presence of vibrational excitations and their distribution
along the molecule correlates with the observation of energetically low-lying molecular states. This
correlation allows to explain the different numbers of vibrational signatures for molecules embedded
within different structures as well as the bias asymmetry of the vibrational intensities within an
individual molecule. Our observations are in agreement with a resonant enhancement of vibrations
by the virtual excitation of electronic states.

INTRODUCTION

Since the seminal discovery of molecular excitations in
single molecules on surfaces by inelastic electron tunnel-
ing spectroscopy (IETS) in a scanning tunneling micro-
scope (STM) [1], various studies reported on the obser-
vation of vibrational excitations of chemisorbed as well
as physisorbed molecules [2 -- 10]. For some molecules, a
large set of vibrational excitations was observed, whereas
others did not show a single vibrational mode. Moreover,
the resolution of vibrational excitations depended on the
specific substrate underneath the molecules [9]. While
selection rules exist that predict the intensity of vibra-
tional modes for optical spectroscopic techniques, such as
Raman and infrared spectroscopy, there are no such uni-
versal criteria in scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS).
Instead, a set of propensity rules has been proposed [11 -- 
13].

Theoretical models suggested different mechanisms
leading to vibrational excitations within the neutral
molecule, i.e., at energies below a molecular ion reso-
nance. The common requirement is that the energy of
the tunneling electron exceeds the excitation energy of
the vibration [14]. The first mechanism is an excitation
via impact scattering of the tunneling electron, which
is independent of existing molecular resonances [15, 16].
The corresponding change of the differential conductance
(dI/dV ) is positive but typically very small [15], such
that excitations by impact scattering are rarely detected
in spectroscopy. The second mechanism depends on the
electronic structure. Even for the case that the electron
energy falls below a molecular resonance, virtual excita-

tions to low-lying molecular states enhance the excitation
cross section of vibrations [4 -- 6, 16 -- 18]. Note, that this
regime is distinctly different from the resonant regime,
in which the vibrational excitation occurs in the charged
state, such that vibronic peaks would appear on top of
the molecular resonance in the dI/dV spectra [19, 20].
Due to the limited lifetime of the vibronic states in
molecules on metal substrates, the vibronic peaks would
just contribute to an overall broadening of the electronic
resonances.
In the resonant regime, the observation of
vibronic peaks has been improved by an increase of the
lifetime of the excited states by either ultrathin insulating
layers [21, 22], layers of organic molecules [18] or bulky
molecular groups attached to the molecule, which were
employed to decouple the molecule from the substrate
[23].

Off-resonance inelastic vibrational excitations are typ-
ically not observed when the molecules lie on decou-
pling layers, because the probability of virtual excita-
tions is suppressed due to the up-shift of the molecular
ion resonances. It is therefore difficult to achieve opti-
mum conditions for the observation of strong inelastic
signals. One notable example of achieving these condi-
tions was reported by Ohta et al. on Fe-phthalocyanine
bilayers on Ag(111) [24]. The authors also noted a pecu-
liar difference in the observation of different vibrational
modes in different adsorption configurations, which could
not be explained within the currently available models
and underlines the quest for a microscopic understand-
ing of propensity rules. However, propensity rules also
include the electronic structure of the molecule and the
tip [10, 11, 25, 26] and the dipole moment of the modes

[25]. The experimental verification of propensity rules is
challenging, because the variation of one of these param-
eters is typically achieved by exchanging the molecule,
which often entails a variation in several properties. To
avoid these complexities, previous studies compared the
IETS signal of the same molecule on different surfaces
[9], with different orientations [10, 27], or at different ad-
sorption sites [28]. Despite all those studies, there is still
no comprehensive picture to date that allows to predict
the intensity of molecular vibrations in IETS. Therefore,
a more detailed understanding is necessary.

Our approach is to use a molecule that exhibits dif-
ferent conformations on a surface. Thereby, the elec-
tronic structure undergoes some variations while local
vibrational modes, such as C -- H- and C -- C-stretching and
bending modes are not expected to change much. Such a
system allows for a direct correlation of electronic struc-
ture and vibrational excitation intensity. We use the
flexible molecule Fe-5,10,15,20-tetra-4-pyridyl-porphyrin
(FeTPyP) (shown in Fig. 1a) as a model system to inves-
tigate the role of the electronic structure for the detec-
tion of vibrations in tunneling spectroscopy within the
same species. The FeTPyP molecules consist of an Fe
center embedded in a porphyrin core with four pyridyl
moieties [29, 30]. This molecule adapts different struc-
tures in molecular assemblies, concomitant with a change
in the energy-level alignments. Using STS, we find up to
nine inelastic steps in some of the molecular structures
while others are featureless. We identify seven of these
steps as molecular vibrations whereas the other two cor-
respond to spin excitations. We show that the intensity
of vibrational excitations can be correlated to the energy
of the frontier molecular orbitals in the different struc-
tures. We explicitly show that an asymmetric electronic
structure around the Fermi level leads to an asymmetry
in the vibrational excitation intensity when comparing
peaks at positive and negative bias voltage.

METHODS

All experiments were performed under ultra-high vac-
uum conditions with in-situ sample preparation in dif-
ferent chambers. The clean Au(111) samples were pre-
pared by subsequent cycles of sputtering and anneal-
ing. The FeTPyP-Cl molecules were deposited from a
Knudsen cell evaporator at 410 ◦C onto a Au(111) sam-
ple held at room temperature. During the deposition,
the molecules are dechlorinated, such that the Fe-center
changes its oxidation state from +3 to +2 [31 -- 34]. The
STM measurements were performed in two different low-
temperature STMs, working at 1.1 K and 4.5 K, as indi-
cated in the respective figure captions. The images were
taken in constant-current mode, whereas dI/dV spec-
tra were recorded in open feedback-loop conditions with
a lock-in amplifier. HREELS measurements were per-

2

Figure 1. a) Schematic structure of the FeTPyP molecule,
with the pyrrole groups marked in blue and the freely rotat-
able pyridyl groups indicated in orange. Due to its flexibility,
the molecules adapt a saddle-shape configuration upon ad-
sorption. b-d) Different arrangements of FeTPyP on Au(111):
b) Disordered structure of FeTPyP; c) Densely-packed struc-
ture of FeTPyP; d) Staggered arrangement of FeTPyP with
an alternating orientation of the molecules. In this arrange-
ment, two types of molecules can be identified by their spec-
tral properties. In all STM topographies, the saddle-shape de-
formation of the molecules is apparent, as two pyrrole groups
of the molecules appear higher than the other two. The color
of the boxes around the images indicates the colors of the
spectra in Fig. 2). Topographies recorded at 440 mV, 93 pA
(b), 200 mV, 200 pA (c) and 230 mV, 160 pA (d).

formed at 90 K at an incident electron energy of 3.5 eV.
DFT calculations were performed for single molecules in
gas phase using the Gaussian 09 package [35] and employ-
ing the B3PW91 hybrid functional. We used the 6-31g*
basis set for C, N and H atoms and the LanL2dz basis
set with effective core potentials (ECP) for Fe.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Using scanning tunneling microscopy, we observe three
different structures of FeTPyP on Au(111). An STM to-
pography of the first observed molecular arrangement at
sub-monolayer coverage is shown in Fig. 1b. It reveals a
disordered arrangement of the FeTPyP molecules with
the pyridyl moieties of neighboring molecules facing each
other. We speculate that atoms that were unintendedly
co-deposited during the evaporation act as bonding nodes
to the electron-rich pyridyl endgroups. These appear flat-
ter than typically observed in pure molecular structures.

1.4nm1.4nm1.4nmd)c)top viewpyridylgrouppyrrolegroupa)b)The rather flat pyridyl groups lead to an enhancement
of the screening and hybridization of the molecule with
the substrate's electronic states [36]. This is reflected in
low-lying molecular states (see below).

In a different preparation, we find two densely-packed
arrangements without any adatoms.
In the first, the
molecules are aligned in two alternating rows of paral-
lel molecules (Fig. 1c). In the second structure (Fig. 1d),
the molecules are ordered in a staggered arrangement,
with their saddle orientation rotated by 90° with respect
to the neighboring molecules. This structure contains
two different types of FeTPyP molecules, which exhibit
distinct spectroscopic properties. The saddle deforma-
tion, which is observable in all structures,
is a result
of molecule -- substrate interactions [37]. These force the
pyridyl groups from the perpendicular orientation with
respect to the porpyhrin plane into an inclined orienta-
tion. As a consequence of steric hindrance between adja-
cent hydrogen atoms in the pyrrole and pyridyl groups,
two pyrrole groups bend up while the other pair is bent
down.

To compare the properties of the FeTPyP molecules
in the different arrangements, dI/dV spectra in the en-
ergy range of ±150 meV are shown in Fig. 2, which were
recorded both in the center and on the upper pyrrole
group of the molecules. The color of the spectra corre-
sponds to the color of the boxes around the respective
molecular structures in Fig. 1. For comparison, a spec-
trum of one of the metal-free TPyP molecules, which are
occasionally found on the surface, is shown as well. It
neither exhibits peaks nor steps. In the center of all Fe-
containing molecules (Fig. 2a), an almost bias-symmetric
shape on the scale of ±150 meV can be observed. How-
ever, upon closer inspection there are some differences.
The red and green spectra exhibit a strong increase in
conductance at ±80 meV. At similar energies, the con-
ductance increase in the black spectrum seems broader.
The blue spectrum is almost featureless at negative bias
voltages and exhibits a shoulder at about 70 meV at pos-
itive bias voltage. Additionally, all of these spectra show
one or two steps at low bias voltages (see grey shaded
area), which are attributed to inelastic spin excitations
[34]. Moreover, the green and red curve show a variety of
steps at higher energies, whose position and relative in-
tensities are independent of the employed Au tip. These
higher-lying steps are assigned to vibrational excitations.
In Fig. 2b, we probe the presence/absence of steps on
the upper pyrrole groups of the molecules. While the
low-energy spin excitations are present in all molecules
also on the ligand, the overall lineshapes of the dI/dV
spectra differ quite drastically between the molecules in
the different structures. The blue and the black spectra
show a rather flat dI/dV curve at negative bias volt-
ages, whereas the green and red spectra exhibit a broad
shoulder at around −84 mV. Moreover, only the red and
green spectra exhibit some additional steps at positive

3

bias voltages. These steps are followed by double-peak
structures at about 35 mV and 90 mV. In the black spec-
trum these peaks appear shifted to higher energies, i.e.,
to 70 mV and 115 mV (see grey dashed line as guide to
the eye of the shift). The blue spectrum exhibits a single
peak at 72 mV.

To confirm the assignment of the higher-lying steps as
vibrational excitations, we performed HREELS measure-
ments. HREELS is a complementary method to iden-
tify molecular vibrations by inelastic electron scattering
[38, 39]. The incident electron energy (here 3.5 eV) ex-
ceeds the energies for vibrational transitions such that
vibrational excitations lead to energy losses of the scat-
tered electrons. Spectra taken on a monolayer deposited
at room temperature and measured in specular scattering
geometry (thus containing dipole and impact scattered
electrons) are shown in Fig. 3a (red). Apart from the elas-
tic peak, several vibrations are visible. Post-annealing to
400 K results in an intensity-rise of the elastic peak and
better resolved vibrational peaks (black curve in Fig. 3a)
while the vibrational energies are unchanged. The larger
elastic peak intensity as well as the higher energy resolu-
tion (around 4.7 meV FWHM for the black and 7.9 meV
for the red spectrum) suggests a higher degree of long-
range order of the molecular layer after annealing.

However, we note that the existence of vibrational ex-
citations is independent of the preparation conditions.
Indeed, we repeated the measurements on several prepa-
rations without a change of the vibrational energies. A
close-up view on the low-energy loss region (see inset of
Fig. 3a) indicates that the lowest vibrational mode lies
at 16 meV. The absence of peaks at even lower energies
corroborates the interpretation of the lowest two steps in
the dI/dV spectra as spin excitations.

For better comparison of vibrational energies detected
by HREELS and IETS, we plot the d2I/dV 2 spectra of
the molecules in the green and red structure (Fig. 3b).
The steps in the dI/dV spectra correspond to peaks and
dips in the d2I/dV 2 signals at positive and negative bias
voltage, respectively. The dashed lines indicate the peak
positions of the vibrational modes as deduced from the
HREEL spectrum. Besides the two lowest-energy peaks
in the d2I/dV 2 signal, which have been discussed above,
we find similarities between the vibrational modes from
the IETS and from the HREELS measurements.

A more detailed comparison of the vibrational ener-
gies is compiled in Tab. I. We note that there are differ-
ences in the mode energies of a few meV between the
HREELS data as well as between the staggered and dis-
ordered structure probed by IETS. We suggest that the
different mode energies in IETS can be qualitatively un-
derstood by the different molecular conformations. The
deviation from the HREELS data is roughly of the same
size. However, HREELS is an ensemble method, such
that an average energy both of several molecules and of
different structures is determined, whereas dI/dV spec-

4

Figure 2. Comparison of the vibrational signatures a) in the center and b) on the ligand of FeTPyP molecules in the different
arrangements (compare to color of the boxes in Fig. 1). Overall, all FeTPyP molecules show bias-symmetric lineshapes in the
center, and more asymmetric lineshapes on the ligand. The featureless gray spectrum corresponds to a non-metallated TPyP
molecule. Different numbers of steps can be observed in the spectra. The gray-shaded area indicates those steps that originate
from spin excitations. Feedback opened at green: 150 mV, 3 nA with Vmod = 1 mV, T = 4.5 K; red and blue: 200 mV, 2 nA
with Vmod = 0.5 mV, B = 0.5 T, T = 1.1 K; black and gray: 200 mV, 2 nA with Vmod = 1 mV, T = 4.5 K.

Table I. Assignment of the peaks in the HREEL spectra to steps in the dI/dV signal of the staggered and the disordered
arrangements of FeTPyP, together with a general assignment of the modes by comparison to DFT calculations (b3pw91/genecp).
All energies are given in meV.
HREELS IETS (stagg.) IETS (disord.) Mode
16
32
45
60
70
78
88
100
109
122
135
151

24.4
33.9
-
61.0
-
80.4
-
-
107
-
-
-

21
30.5
-
54
69
-
90
-
104
115
-
-

(cid:27)



buckling/breathing modes, Fe-tapping

C-C/C-H stretching and bending modes

troscopy determines the vibrational energies of a specific
molecule. Moreover, the excitation mechanism of the two
spectroscopic methods is different, which might account
for further discrepancies in the spectra.

To gain qualitative insights into the origin of the modes
and of the deviations, we performed DFT calculations
(see Methods) of isolated FeTPyP molecules with two
different dihedral angles (25° and 60°), which mimic dif-
ferent degrees of the saddle-shape distortion. Indeed, the
energies of the modes of these molecules differ. However,
it is difficult to draw a one-to-one correspondence be-
tween these modes and the experimentally observed ones.

The calculations reveal more than 100 different modes in
the considered energy window. Therefore, we only cat-
egorize the modes at low and high energies. The low-
energy modes correspond to symmetric and asymmetric
buckling and stretching modes of the pyrrole groups, as
well as Fe tapping modes. Since these modes involve a
deformation of the pyrrole groups and the Fe -- N distance
within the molecule, their energies are expected to de-
pend on the exact conformation of the molecule on the
surface. At higher energies, the vibrational modes con-
stitute in-plane and out-of-plane stretching and bend-
ing modes of the C -- H and C -- C bonds.
Similar vi-

a)b)5

as the measurements in the center of the molecule and
on the ligand were all performed using the same tip, this
cannot explain the different inelastic signals.

Instead, by comparison to the position of close-lying
resonances in the dI/dV spectra, we find that the in-
tensity of the vibrational modes across the molecules fol-
lows the localization of the molecular electronic states.
The overall symmetric shape of the dI/dV spectra in the
center of the molecules (Fig. 2a) suggests the presence
of occupied and unoccupied molecular states symmetri-
cally around the Fermi level.
In contrast, the energies
of molecular states on the ligand are asymmetric with
bias polarity, as the spectra in Fig. 2b only reveal states
at positive bias voltages. The absence of features in the
dI/dV spectra around EF on the metal-free porphyrin
(gray curve in Fig. 2a) indicates that the conductance in
the FeTPyP molecules mainly stems from Fe d states.
This interpretation is supported by recent studies on Fe-
tetra-phenyl-porphyrin (FeTPP) on Au(111) [41], which
showed similar lineshapes. In that case, the density of
states (DoS) around the Fermi level in the center of the
molecule was assigned to the half-occupied dz2 orbital,
which mostly interacts with the substrate. The resonance
at positive bias voltages on the upper pyrrole groups was
assigned to an empty hybrid state between the Fe dyz
orbital and ligand states. Given the structural and spec-
troscopic similarities between FeTPyP and FeTPP, this
assignment is probably also valid for our case.

This electronic structure allows us to correlate the elec-
tronic structure with the vibrational sensitivity. We first
analyze the observations in the center of the molecules.
In the absence of any molecular states close to EF, the ex-
citation cross section of molecular vibrations is negligible.
This is the case for the metal-free molecule. In contrast,
the red and green spectrum show the largest increase
of conductance at ±80 meV. The energetic proximity of
occupied and unoccupied d states thus enhances the ex-
citation cross section of the molecular vibrations at both
bias polarities. A broadening of these states as in the
black and blue spectrum largely suppresses the inelastic
excitation probability. On the ligand, the situation be-
comes even more interesting. In this case, there are only
unoccupied states close to EF, which stem from a differ-
ent orbital than in the center. The presence of this state
enhances the vibrational excitations for the red and green
molecule at positive bias voltages. This hybrid state is
shifted away from EF in the blue and black spectra, such
that the IETS intensity is below our experimental reso-
lution. At negative bias voltages, none of the molecular
species exhibits occupied states sufficiently close to EF.
All observations thus agree with the picture of an en-
hancement of the IETS signal by the presence of a low-
energy molecular resonance. The lower the energy of the
virtual excitation of this resonance, the more probable is
this excitation. Therefore, also the cross section of the
inelastic excitations increases.

Figure 3. Identification of molecular vibrations: a) HREEL
spectrum recorded with a primary electron energy of 3.5 eV
in specular scattering geometry before annealing (red) and
after annealing to 400 K (black). The energy resolution mea-
sured as FWHM of the elastically scattered electrons (elastic
peak) is 4.7 meV (black) and 7.9 meV (red). The inset shows
the low-energy region of the annealed sample, confirming the
absence of vibrational modes below 16 meV. b) Compari-
son between the numerically derived d2I/dV 2 spectra (green
and red) corresponding to the dI/dV spectra of Fig. 2a and
the HREEL spectrum of the annealed sample (black). The
dashed lines indicate the positions of the vibrational modes as
determined from the HREEL spectrum. The two lowest-lying
peaks in the d2I/dV 2 spectra, are assigned to spin excitations.

brational modes at comparable energies were also ob-
served on double-layer FePc molecules on Ag(111) [24],
in agreement with similar intramolecular bonds in these
molecules.

In Fig. 2 we saw that the vibrational excitations were
only resolved in the dI/dV spectra of some of the molec-
ular structures and with strong bias asymmetries. To
understand these variations, we first consider possible
effects of the tunneling barrier and the tip's electronic
structure. Small asymmetries of the signal intensities at
opposite bias voltages might be explained by an asym-
metry of the tunneling barrier [40]. However, barrier-
induced differences in the signal intensity should occur
similarly at all positions across the molecule, which is in
contrast to our experimental findings of almost symmet-
ric intensities in the center. Moreover, the symmetry and
electronic structure of the tip was shown to affect the in-
tensity of the vibrational fingerprints [25, 26]. However,

b)a)103104105504030201043210400350300250200150100500Electron Energy Loss [meV]Intensity [10-5 s-1] -no annealingannealed to 400 Kx 200Intensity [s-1]Electron Energy Loss [meV]163245324560707888100122135151175193246380109CONCLUSIONS

339 (1987).

6

We resolved several molecular vibrations of FeTPyP
on a Au(111) substrate by a combination of HREEL and
dI/dV spectroscopy. A comparison of different struc-
tures of FeTPyP on a Au(111) substrate showed a varying
number of inelastic steps between 20 meV and 120 meV
in the corresponding dI/dV spectra, which were asso-
ciated with excitations of molecular vibrations.
Inter-
estingly, the intensity of the inelastic steps varied be-
tween the molecular structures and within the individ-
ual molecules. The simultaneous resolution of molecular
orbital energies suggests a correlation of the vibration
intensity with the proximity of the molecular orbital to
the Fermi level. This correlation immediately reflects
the applicability of the resonant-enhancement model [17],
which describes the vibrational excitation via virtual ex-
citations of molecular resonances.

Funding by the ERC Consolidator grant "NanoSpin"
(K. J. F.) and by the International Max Planck Research
School "Functional Interfaces in Physics and Chemistry"
(D. R.) is gratefully acknowledged. F. M. and P. T. ac-
knowledge funding by the German Research Foundation
(DFG) through collaborative research center SFB1249
"N-Heteropolycylces as Functional Materials" (project
B06).

[18] K. J. Franke and J. I. Pascual, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter

24, 394002 (2012).

[19] N. Liu, N. A. Pradhan, and W. Ho, J. Chem. Phys. 120,

11371 (2004).

[20] T. Frederiksen, K. J. Franke, A. Arnau, G. Schulze,
J. I. Pascual, and N. Lorente, Phys. Rev. B 78, 233401
(2008).

[21] X. H. Qiu, G. V. Nazin, and W. Ho, Phys. Rev. Lett.

92, 206102 (2004).

[22] N. Krane, C. Lotze, G. Reecht, L. Zhang, A. L. Briseno,

and K. J. Franke, ACS Nano 12, 11698 (2018).

[23] F. Matino, G. Schull, F. Kohler, S. Gabutti, M. Mayor,

and R. Berndt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 961 (2011).

[24] N. Ohta, R. Arafune, N. Tsukahara, M. Kawai,

and

N. Takagi, J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 21832 (2013).

[25] A. Garcia-Lekue, D. Sanchez-Portal, A. Arnau,

and

T. Frederiksen, Phys. Rev. B 83, 155417 (2011).

[26] N. Pavlicek, I. Swart, J. Niedenfuhr, G. Meyer,

and

J. Repp, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 136101 (2013).

[27] S. Meierott, N. N´eel, and J. Kroger, Phys. Rev. B 96,

205437 (2017).

[28] H. Gawronski and K. Morgenstern, Phys. Rev. B 89,

125420 (2014).

[29] E. B. Fleischer, J. M. Palmer, T. S. Srivastava,
A. Chatterjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 93, 3162 (1971).

and

[30] M. R. Nabid, Z. Zamiraei, R. Sedghi, and N. Safari,

React. Funct. Polym. 69, 319 (2009).

[31] B. W. Heinrich, G. Ahmadi, V. L. Muller, L. Braun, J. I.
Pascual, and K. J. Franke, Nano Lett. 13, 4840 (2013).
[32] B. W. Heinrich, L. Braun, J. I. Pascual, and K. J. Franke,

Nano Lett. 15, 4024 (2015).

[33] T. G. Gopakumar, H. Tang, J. Morillo, and R. Berndt,

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 11844 (2012).

[34] D. Rolf, C. Lotze, C. Czekelius, B. W. Heinrich, and

[1] B. C. Stipe, M. A. Rezaei, and W. Ho, Science 280, 1732

K. J. Franke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 9, 6563 (2018).

(1998).

[2] W. Ho, J. Chem. Phys. 117, 11033 (2002).
[3] T. Komeda, Progr. Surf. Sci. 78, 41 (2005).
[4] L. J. Lauhon and W. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 2463

(2000).

[5] J. I. Pascual, J. J. Jackiw, Z. Song, P. S. Weiss, H. Con-
rad, and H.-P. Rust, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1050 (2001).
[6] Y. Kim, T. Komeda, and M. Kawai, Phys. Rev. Lett.

89, 126104 (2002).

[7] A. J. Heinrich, J. A. Gupta, C. P. Lutz, and D. M. Eigler,

Science 306, 466 (2004).

[8] N. Okabayashi, Y. Konda, and T. Komeda, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 100, 217801 (2008).

[9] K. J. Franke, G. Schulze, and J. I. Pascual, J. Phys.

Chem. Lett. 1, 500 (2010).

[10] S. Meierott, N. N´eel, and J. Kroger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett.

7, 2388 (2016).

[11] N. Lorente, M. Persson, L. J. Lauhon, and W. Ho, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 86, 2593 (2001).

[12] A. Troisi and M. A. Ratner, Nano Lett. 6, 1784 (2006).
[13] M. Paulsson, T. Frederiksen, H. Ueba, N. Lorente, and

M. Brandbyge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 226604 (2008).

[14] R. C. Jaklevic and J. Lambe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 17, 1139

(1966).

[15] N. Lorente and M. Persson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2997

(2000).

[16] N. Lorente, Appl. Phys. A 78, 799 (2004).
[17] B. N. J. Persson and A. Baratoff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59,

[35] M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria,
M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone,
B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Cari-
cato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino,
G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toy-
ota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima,
Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Mont-
gomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark,
J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov,
R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Ren-
dell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi,
N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B.
Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts,
R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi,
C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma,
V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannen-
berg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, . Farkas, J. B. Fores-
man, J. V. Ortiz, J. Cioslowski, and D. J. Fox, Gaussian
Inc. Wallingford CT 2009.

[36] X. Chen, L. Shulai, C. Lotze, C. Czekelius, B. Paulus,

and K. J. Franke, J. Chem. Phys. 146, 092316 (2017).

[37] W. Auwarter, A. Weber-Bargioni, S. Brink, A. Riemann,
A. Schiffrin, M. Ruben, and J. V. Barth, Chem. Phys.
Chem. 8, 250 (2007).

[38] H.

Ibach

and

D.

L.

Mills,

Electron Energy Loss Spectroscopy and Surface Vibrations
(Academic Press, New York, 1982).

[39] F. Maass, A. Stein, B. Kohl, L. Hahn, L. H. Gade,

M. Mastalerz, and P. Tegeder, J. Phys. Chem. C 120,
2866 (2016).

[40] L. J. Lauhon and W. Ho, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 72, 216

(2001).

[41] C. Rubio-Verd´u, A. Sarasola, D.-J. Choi, Z. Majzik,
R. Ebeling, M. R. Calvo, M. M. Ugeda, A. Garcia-Lekue,
D. S´anchez-Portal, and J. I. Pascual, Comms. Phys. 1,
15 (2018).

7

