Mesoscopic Origin of Ferroelectric-Ferroelectric Transition in BaTiO3 

Asaf Hershkovitz,1,2 Florian Johann,3 Maya Barzilay,1,2 Alon Hendler Avidor1,2 and Yachin Ivry1,2,* 

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Technion  --  Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 
3200003, Israel 
2Solid State Institute, Technion  --  Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 3200003, Israel 
3Asylum Research, an Oxford Instruments company, 6310 Hollister Ave, Goleta, CA 93117, U. S. A. 
*ivry@technion.ac.il. 
 

Ferroelectric materials are the core of common technologies, such as medical ultrasound, 

mobile-phone  antennae  and  low-power  memory  devices.  The  technological  interest  in 

ferroelectrics stems from the existence of switchable mesoscale polarization domains. Hence, 

understanding  the  origin  of  ferroelectric  functionality  requires  realization  of  the  domain 

dynamics  during  a 

ferroelectric 

transformation.  However,  domain  dynamics 

characterization  at  the  mesoscale  is  typically  too  slow  with  respect  to  the  abrupt  ferroic 

transition.  Using  scanning  probe  microscopy  with  15-mK  thermal-,  and  deep-submicron 

spatial- resolution, we realized the domain dynamics during an orthorhombic-to-tetragonal 

transition in the seminal ferroelectric BaTiO3. We show that the transition comprises four 

distinguishable  mechanisms.  The  dominant  mechanism  is  a  step-by-step  progression  of  a 

tetragonal-domain wavefront into the orthorhombic phase. This progression is accompanied 

by  ripple-like  surface  irregularities.  Small  island  domains  that  remained  orthorhombic 

diffuse then slowly after the wavefront progression. Finally, the resultant tetragonal domains 

equilibrate by coalescing in a constant-speed. These  observations, which are  accompanied 

by  quantitative  data,  bridge  between  existing  macroscopic  and  microscopic  models 

regarding  the  nature  of  ferroelectric  transitions,  showing  the  mesoscale  origin  of 

ferroelectricity.  

 

1 

After Helen Megaw observed experimentally1 the symmetry change in BaTiO3 already in 1945, 

Cochran2  suggested  that  the  transition  is  governed  by  lattice  instability.  The  description  of  a 

spontaneous symmetry change as the origin of ferroelectricity has been adopted by Anderson3 and 

Ginzburg.4,5  In  these  models,  higher-symmetry  crystallographic  phase  transfers  to  the  lower-

symmetry phase (or vice versa) in an organized manner, as in a card-house collapse. That is, the 

transition is displacive and is governed by collective non-local interactions.6 Displacive transitions 

are  diffusionless,7  which  are  not  very  common  and  exist,  e.g.  in  some  ferromagnets  and 

superconductors,  mainly  those  that  exhibit  ferroelasticity.8  The  displacive  mechanism  in 

ferroelectrics  was  then  questioned  when  x-ray  scattering  results  implied9  on  short-range 

interactions, which give rise to a diffusive transition at random points, as in the case of bubble 

formation  in  boiling  water.  This  diffusive  mechanism  is  different  from  an  organized  displasive 

transition.  Later  first-principle10  and  computer-based11  models  suggested  that  the  onset  of 

ferroelectricity  is  a  displacive-diffusive  mixture.  These  predictions  were  then  supported  by 

macroscopic x-ray12 and magnetic-resonance13 characterizations. Nevertheless, the origin of the 

transition at the domain scale has remained elusive. 

Submicron-resolution  studies  of  domain  statics  are  commonly  available,  e.g.  with 

piezoresponse  force  microscopy  (PFM).14  Some  works  involve  also  static  domain  imaging  of 

several different crystallographic phases.15 -- 17 Dynamic characterizations are more challenging due 

to  the  typical  short  time  scale  of  the  transition  with  respect  to  the  measurement  time.18,19  Only 

handful  successful  mesoscale  domain-dynamic  observations  have  been  reported,20 -- 22  mainly 

during electric-field switching. However, a combination of high-resolution and rapid imaging of 

mesoscale domain dynamics at variable temperatures is crucial for understanding the origin of the 

ferroic transition, while such measurements are unavailable. 

 

2 

Ferroelectric-ferroelectric  transitions  are  of  a  special  interest  for  realizing  the  domain 

organization not only during, but also before and after the phase transformation. Observing domain 

dynamics around such a transition allows an excellent opportunity for determining the kinetics of 

ferroic domains.23 -- 29 Here, we revealed the mesoscale domain dynamics at the orthorhombic-to-

tetragonal  transformation  in  a  single  crystal  BaTiO3  by  means  of  variable-temperature  PFM 

mapping with high temperature stability. Simultaneous topography mapping allowed an important 

complementary characterization. The temperature stability allowed us to rump up the temperature 

reliably during the phase transition by less than 1⁰ C over the course of ~48 minutes, slowing down 

the transition to the time scale relevant for PFM imaging. We demonstrated that the transition takes 

place in four distinguishable steps: (i) pre-transition material softening; (ii) displacive tetragonal 

wavefront penetration towards the orthorhombic phase with local order-disorder variations; (iii) 

diffusive  pinning-depinning  of  domain  islands;  and  (iv)  post-transition  zipping-like  domain-

coalescence relaxation of the resultant phase. We demonstrate the dynamics of each mechanism 

by  means  of  direct  observations  of  the  domain  evolution,  available  as  both  videos  and  figures. 

Moreover, we quantified the typical lengthscale and time scale of each mechanism. We show that 

each of the four steps complies with a different theoretical prediction, so that competing models 

describe  the  constituent  steps  of  the  phase  transition.  Finally,  the  coexistence  of  tetragonal-

orthorhombic domains supplies us with a direct observation of the transition's first-order nature. 

The  primary  part  of  the  transition  occurred  when  a  zigzag  wavefront  of  striped  tetragonal 

domains  penetrated  the  orthorhombic  domain  mesh  with  a  nearly  constant  speed  of  32  nm  s-1. 

Video SI1 and Figure1 show the wavefront progression in a 86 × 86 μm2 during 2884 s, when the 

BaTiO3 was heated gradually by 0.97⁰ C.30 The angle between two zigs in the zigzag wavefront is 

roughly 11⁰, while the angle between the orthorhombic and tetragonal domains is 45⁰. Following 

 

3 

Marton  et  al.,31  the  observed  45⁰  orientation  of  orthorhombic  domain  walls  with  respect  to  the 

pseudo-cubic structure as well as the zigzag shape of the wavefront (11⁰ opening) indicate that 

domains  slide  along  the  (0.7,0.13,-0.7)  plane    (see  Extended  Data  Figures  1  and  2  for  a  more 

detailed  crystallographic  analysis).  The  continuous  wavefront  progression  of  the  sliding 

orthorhombic-tetragonal domain walls along a well-defined crystallographic plane indicates that 

the dominant part of the transition is of a displacive. Moreover, the coexistence of tetragonal and 

orthorhombic  domains  during  the  ferroelectric  transformation  clearly  indicate  on  a  first  order 

transition. 

 

Figure  1    Ferroic  domain  dynamics  during  orthorhombic-to-tetragonal  transition: 

wavefront progression. Upon heating a BaTiO3 single crystal, orthorhombic elastic domains (A) 

were gradually being pushed away by a progressing tetragonal wavefront (highlighted with a white 

curve). (B-K) This transition occurred by a sliding tetragonal-orthorhombic domain wall along the 

(0.7,0.13, 0.7)  pseudo-cubic  plane  (see  Figure  SI1)  until  a  uniform  tetragonal  striped  structure 

 

4 

finally  dominated  (L).  The  tetragonal  cusp  of  the  wavefront  penetrated  further  the  tetragonal  c 

domains  (darker  stripes),  while  the  a-domain  (brighter  stripes)  cusp  was  predominantly 

orthorhombic (see Figure SI1-2). Local zigzag shape variations within the larger scale wavefront 

indicate on the mixed short- and long- range dynamics at the transition. Temperature (T) and time 

(t) of the lateral PFM amplitude scans are overlaid. 

 

The wavefront progression governs the transition from orthorhombic to tetragonal in most of 

the material. However, in some areas, the domains undergo the transformation with a competing 

mechanism that takes place in parallel to the wavefront progression. Two effects can be attributed 

to this competing switching mechanism, which requires a more careful treatment. First, there are 

some local variations in the ~11⁰ zigzag opening angle (Figure 1). Secondly, when the variations 

in the zigzag shape are large, the striped tetragonal domains not continuous after the wavefront 

had passed. Rather, small island-like bundle domain32 structures seems to nucleate at the points 

where  the  wavefront  was  distorted  (See  Figure  2  as  well  as  in  Video  SI2).  Following  previous 

analyses,31 these islands are most likely not tetragonal, but are remnants of orthorhombic domains 

or an intermediate monoclinic structure.16,33,34 

The  correlation  between  the  formation  of  island  domains  and  strong  variation  in  the 

orthorhombic-tetragonal common domain wall (i.e. distortion of the wavefront) suggests that the 

creation of these domains is associated with high local strain concentrations. Moreover, as opposed 

to  the  rather  homogeneous  nature  of  the  wavefront-progression  transition,  the  island-domain 

distribution  is  inhomogeneous.  Such  inhomogeneous  local  strain  variations  imply  that  island 

domains are formed due to pinning sites, which are induced either by local crystallographic defects 

 

5 

in  the  native  crystal  or  due  to  local  strain  concentration  that  evolves  during  the  transition.  A 

possible explanation to the origin of the latter is given in Figure SI2. 

 

Figure  2    Island  domain  formation  during  a  ferroic  transition.  During  the  wavefront 

progression  (Figure  1),  erratic  domain  islands  were  formed  (highlighted).  Simultaneously 

measured signals of PFM in-plane (A) amplitude and (B) phase, PFM out-of-plane (C) amplitude 

and (D) phase (insert: topography) at 𝑇 = 14.65⁰ C  and 𝑡 = 2097  s (corresponding to Figure 1i) 

allowed us to analyze31 that these domains are not tetragonal (rather, they are most likely either 

remnants of orthorhombic domains or an intermediate monoclinic structure16,33,34). 

 

The island domains complete the transition to a continuous tetragonal striped domain structure 

in a much slower process in comparison to the displacive transition of the wavefront progression. 

Video SI2 and Figure 3 shows that this depinning relaxation process took place even when the 

temperature was held constant already above the transition (𝑇 = 20 ± 0.015⁰ C). We found that 

 

6 

the change in area size was rather linear with time. Although each island domain had a different 

relaxation rate, we calculated the fastest relaxation speed to be < 4000 ± 300 nm2 s-1 (see Figure 

3F for details). The observed slow relaxation and arbitrary location of the islands indicates that 

this  transformation  mechanism  is  not  displacive.  Rather,  the  observed  pinning-depinning 

mechanism  is  of  an  order-disorder  diffusive  nature.  This  mechanism  that  has  been  explained 

theoretically35  and  was  confirmed  with  previous  x-ray  diffraction  experiments33  is  supposedly 

competing with the displacive transition. However, the observation of both a displacive (wavefront 

progression) and diffusive (islands) mechanisms that take place at the same substance, supplies a 

direct evidence that these two competing mechanisms can coexist, albeit at different length and 

time scales. 

  

 

 

Figure  3    Island  domain  depinning  relaxation.  (A-C)  Lateral  PFM  amplitude  images  of  the 

island  domain  depinning  at  𝑇 = 20 ± 0.015⁰ C  (blue  oval  helps  guide  the  eye  of  the  fastest 

process). All scale bars are 20 μm. The detailed depinning relaxation is given in Video SI2. (D) 

Representative data of the domain island depinning dynamics which is given by the dependence 

of the island area on time, showing < 4000 ± 300 nm2 s-1 relaxation rate, which is much slower 

than the displacive wavefront progression, indicating on the diffusive nature of this process. 

 

7 

 

The wavefront progression and island depinning are the only two mechanisms we identified as 

in  charge  of  the  orthorhombic-to-tetragonal  domain  transformation.  Yet,  the  transition  is 

accompanied by clear pre-, and post- transition effects that must also be taken into account when 

discussing the ferroic phase transformation. These effects seem to be essential for the formation 

and completion of the transition and can be attributed to releasing effectively excess strain in the 

crystal.  Thus,  although  each  effect  involves  merely  one  type  of  domains -- orthorhombic  or 

tetragonal, the pre- and post- transition mechanisms have to be discussed within the framework of 

the ferroic phase transformation. 

Figure 4 illustrates the surface topography of the BaTiO3 throughout the wavefront progression 

part of the transition (Figure 1). The data (Figure 4a) show clearly that prior to the transition, the 

topography included quasi-periodic hills. These wrinkles that are designated in Roman numerals 

are 2.5-12-nm high and are of a double periodic structure of a short (I-III and IV-V, ~15 μm) and 

long (I-II and III-IV, 20-25 Roman μm) spacing. Figure 4 and Video SI1 demonstrate that these 

quasi-periodic wrinkles26 exist in the orthorhombic phase, just before the wavefront arrives. As the 

wavefront progresses, wrinkles next to the wavefront (but yet at the native orthorhombic phase) 

dissipated,  while  new  wrinkles  appear  further  away.  This  disappearance  and  appearance  of  the 

quasi-periodic wrinkles looks similar to a lateral sliding of a line fold in a paper sheet, only here 

the  wrinkle  motion  is  discrete.  The  wrinkles  (topographic  corrugation)  and  wavefront  location 

(adopted from the PFM data of Figure 1) are both highlighted in Figure 4, where the disappearing 

and  appearing  wrinkles  are  also  illustrated  (dashed  and  continuous  lines,  respectively,  in  the 

schematic  inserts).  The  quasi-periodic  organization  of  the  wrinkles  and  the  wrinkle  dynamics 

imply on a ripple-like behavior that is common for granular or viscous media (e.g. bedforms36). 

 

8 

That is, at the pre-transition state, the material softens. Such softening can be associated with a 

relaxor-like behavior, which is common in ferroelectrics that their transition spans a temperatures 

range that is much broader than the transition reported here.46 This softening is also reminiscence 

of the concept of Cochran's early model.6 

 

Figure 4  Surface irregularity dynamics at the pre-transition state. Topography imaging of 

the  BaTiO3  reveals  (A)  six  initial  wrinkles  at  the  orthorhombic  phase  (I-VI).  These  surface 

irregularities were organized in alternating short (I-III and IV-V) and long (I-II and III-IV) quasi-

periodic spacing and are ca. 10-nm high. Upon heating, the striped tetragonal domains gradually 

grew from top to bottom (see Figure 1), displacing the wrinkles (zigzag-shaped wavefront that is 

adopted  from  the  simultaneously  taken  PFM  images  in  Figure  1  is  highlighted).  First,  (B)  the 

wrinkle 'I' disappeared and a new wrinkle, 'VI,' appeared (~20.2 μm away from 'V'). Next, (C-

E) the wavefront progressed and the wrinkles gradually dissipated, serving as a precursor of the 

wavefront position. Finally (F) the entire area became striped and no wrinkles were seen. Here, 

 

9 

temperature and time (following  Figure 1) are 𝑇 = 13.95, 14.02, 14.21, 14.46, 14.75, 14.920 C  

and  𝑡 = 0, 263, 786, 1573, 2359, 2884 s  for  the  corresponding  (A-F)  images  of  the  same  area. 

The complete wrinkling dynamics is given alongside the PFM images that show contain wavefront 

progression in Video SI1. 

 

 

In addition to the pre-transition softening effect, our observations clearly indicate on a post-

transition strain-releasing mechanism of the newly formed tetragonal domains. Towards the end 

of  the  transition,  after  the  wavefront  had  passed,  another  relaxation  took  place  in  the  striped 

tetragonal domains. Here, two neighboring a stripes coalesced and wiped out the c domain that 

was  sandwiched  between  them,  so  that  a  broad  single  a  domain  was  formed.  The  domain 

coalescence took place in a zipping-like process. By tracing the progression of the zipping apex, 

we found that this process is linear in time (i.e. constant speed). We found that there are usually 

several sequential zipping events (see Video SI3). Despite the linearity in time of each zipping 

event, the speed decreased gradually between the sequential events from about 20 nm s-1 to 2 nm 

s-1. The gradual decrease in zipping speed indicates on a gradual release of remnant stress. Figure 

5 shows representative data from the slowest zipping events. The complete data from the zipping 

events as well as quantitative analyses of their linear rates are given in Video SI3. 

 

 

 

10 

Figure  5    Constant-speed  zipping-like  coalescence  of  tetragonalstriped  domains.  (A-D) 

Striped elastic tetragonal domains merged into broader stripes in a zipping like process (arrows 

help guide the eye). (E) Zipping progression as a function of time demonstrates a constant speed: 

19.6 ± 0.3 nm s−1.  Data  points  obtained  from  the  zipping  locations  in  (A-D)  are  labeled.  The 

 

complete data and additional zipping events are given in Video SI3. 

 

The zipping process exposes the nature of domain dynamics at the nearly homogeneous 

post-transition tetragonal structure. Domain dynamics of tetragonal stripes play a significant role 

in modern ferroelectric-based technologies.20 Striped-domain coalescence in the form of domain 

doubling  has  garnered  attention  recently,26,32  but  real-time  dynamics  realization  is  still  absent. 

Previous studies suggest that domain mobility is dominated by creep,25 i.e. local crystallographic 

defects38 that diffuse with a power-law rate. Although our observations of a constant-speed zipping 

 

11 

do not support such a description, typically, the power-law exponent is of the order of unity,25,39 

namely, a near-constant speed. Yet, the constant speed mobility is rather unexpected and does not 

comply  with  the  −

1
  time  exponent  that  the  Lifshitz-Slyozov  model40  predicts,  when 
3

accommodating  the  process  of  Ostwald  ripening  to  supersaturated  solid  solutions.  A  possible 

explanation is that while each of the zipping events is of a constant speed, the speed varies between 

sequential zipping events. Thus, at the mesoscopic scale, the inhomogeneous domain behavior that 

is often addressed in other studies, averages and does not show a constant speed at the macroscopic 

domain mobility. 

We  should  note  that  the  zipping  relaxation  may  arise  to  release  strain  in  the  post-transition 

phase,  e.g.  for  complying  with  Roytburd's  scaling  law.41  Strictly  speaking,  the  effect  is  not 

completely post transition because some non-tetragonal islands still exist elsewhere. Likewise, the 

topography ripples in pre-transition softening state are observed in the region that contains only 

orthorhombic domains, i.e. they are taking place before the transition and can be referred to as the 

precursor or the miners' canary of the transition. However, the wrinkles occur when the transition 

already  began  in  a  neighboring  area  and  some  parts  of  the  crystal  was  already  transferred  to 

tetragonal.  Thus,  both  the  pre-transition  softening  and  the  post-transition  zipping  may  be 

considered  as  parts  of  the  transition,  allowing  us  to  distinguish  between  the  four  different 

mechanisms spatially. However, when characterizing the transition macroscopically, one cannot 

distinguish between processes that take place in the tetragonal domains (zipping), processes that 

take  place  in  the  orthorhombic  domains  (wrinkles)  and  processes  that  involve  both  phases 

(wavefront  progression  and  island  domain  depinning).  Therefore,  the  direct  observation  of  the 

domain dynamics during (as well as before and after) the transition supplied here may help explain 

 

12 

some  of  the  contradictions  in  the  literature  regarding  the  dispute  over  the  displacive  versus 

diffusive nature of the transition. 

  The four-step transition reported here indicates on the mesoscale domain origin of a displacive-

diffusive nature of the ferroic transition as well as of the long-range (wavefront) and short-range 

(i.e., zigzag deformations and depinning of the island domains as well as the post-transition zipping 

like  domain  coalescence,  respectively)  competition  it  encompasses.  Our  observations  thus 

complement  for  the  commonly  agreed  three -- step  process  domain  dynamics:  nucleation,  linear 

motion of needle-like domains and sideways growth of domains23,25,42 that presumably dominate 

domain  switching  as  well  as  the  paraelectric-to-ferroelectric  transformation.  We  should  note 

though  that  with  respect  to  domain  nucleation,  it  is  plausible  that  the  wavefront  reported  here 

originated from a nucleation point somewhere else in the crystal.  Future studies that aim at tuning 

the interplay between the entire or part of the four transition steps seen here, e.g. by introducing 

electric field, stress or controlled environment may help prioritize one of the four mechanisms over 

the  others,  perhaps  leading  to  improvement  in  the  functionality  of  ferroelectrics  or  other 

ferroelastic functional materials.43 

Methods 

We used single crystals BaTiO3 of 5×2.5×1 mm in size. Samples (three) were obtained from both 

MaTecK and SurfaceNet, while the samples were acetone and ethanol cleaned. X-ray diffraction 

was done using Rigaku SmartLab diffractometer with Cu electrode (𝜆 = 0.15406 𝑛𝑚) and 𝜃 −

2𝜃 measurement (Figure SI4). The samples were scanned both in a fast broad-spectrum scan (5°-

90°, 7⁰ min-1 and 0.01⁰ jumps) as well as in a slower closer-look scan (44°-46.5°, 1⁰ min-1 and 

0.01⁰ jumps).   

 

13 

X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed in a PHI  --  Versaprobe 

III microprobe system (PHI, USA). XPS surface analyses were done with a monochromatic Al 

(Kα)  radiation  of  1486.6  eV  energy  and  emitted  photoelectrons  were  directed  to  a  spherical 

capacitor analyser (SCA). The x-ray beam created at the surface of the sample localized positive 

charges.  In  order  to  palliate  to  this  localized  surface  charge,  we  used  the  PHI's  dual-beam 

neutralization  technique.  Photoelectron  take  of  angle  (TOA)  was  45°  and  the  photoelectron 

collection  angle  was  ±20°.  The  analysis  area  was  200  m  in  diameter.  Survey  spectrum  was 

recorded before and after sputtering the BaTiO3 single crystal with a 3-kV Ar+ ion gun (data shown 

here in Figure SI4 were collected prior to the Ar+ sputtering). The survey spectra were collected at 

the middle of the sample with a pass energy of 140 eV and a step size of 0.025 eV, from which the 

surface chemical composition was determined (Figure SI4a). The core level binding energies of 

the different peaks were normalized by calibrating the binding energy for C1s at 284.5 eV. The 

atomic concentrations were calculated using elemental relative sensitivity factors from Multipak 

Software library. High energy-resolution measurements were performed with a pass energy of 55 

eV (Figure SI4b-d) and a step size of 0.05 eV. 

Both x-ray diffraction and x-ray photon spectroscopy confirmed the high quality of the BaTiO3 

single crystals, while the native-domain PFM imaging (e.g. Figure 1a) revealed long-range ordered 

coherent  ferroelastic  domain  organization,  which  implies  on  the  high  quality  structure.  PFM 

measurements were carried out with Asylum MFP-3D AFM and DCP01 Probe from TipsNano at 

both ambient and environmental control (with a constant flow of dry air in a sealed cell), deflection 

setpoint: ca. 100 nN. The images were taken in vector mode at vertical frequency of 860 kHz and 

lateral frequency of 1.38 MHz. Drive amplitude for both vertical and lateral excitations was 10 V. 

Fifteen orthorhombic-to-tetragonal transitions were imaged. All mechanisms have been observed 

 

14 

at least twice, while some of the observed transitions took place too fast to allow inter-transition 

imaging (depending also on the heating rate that was changed from one experiment to another). 

Successful  measurements  were  carried  out  also  with  a  diamond  tip  (Adama,  1.56  N/m)  while 

driving 15 V ac voltage at 197 kHz for the vertical signal and 6 V ac voltage at 603 kHz for the 

lateral signal. All PFM and AFM images were taken at 256×512 pixel-resolution scans, using the 

Asylum Research's software. For all images, both the backward and forward scans were recorded, 

while  here,  only  the  forward-direction  images  are  presented  for  the  sake  of  consistency.  No 

manipulation has been conducted to the AFM and PFM images other than the usual AFM flattening 

that  is  compensating  for  the  tip  scan.  Supporting  Videos  1-3  include  negligible  contrast 

adjustments that compensate for the random contrast offset that the microscope produces naturally 

between images. 

References and Notes: 

(1)   Megaw, H. D. Crystal Structure of Barium Titanate. Nature 1945, 155 (3938), 484 -- 485. 

(2)   Cochran, W. Crystal Stability and the Theory of Ferroelectricty. Advances in Physics. 

1960, pp 387 -- 423.  

(3)   Anderson, P. W. Fizika Dielektrikov. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Moscow 1960. 

(4)   Comment: The latter model is often attributed to Devonshire's adoption of the Ginzburg-

Landau model of the superconducting phase transition, See REF 6. 

(5)   Ginzburg, V. L. Some Remarks on Ferroelectricity, Soft Modes and Related Problems. 

Ferroelectrics 1987, 76 (1), 3 -- 22. 

(6)   Aizu, K. Possible Species of "Ferroelastic" Crystals and of Simultaneously Ferroelectic 

and Ferroelastic Crystals. Journal of the Physical Society of Japan. The Physical Society 

 

15 

of Japan August 15, 1969, pp 387 -- 396. 

(7)   Delaey, L. Diffusionless Transformations. In Phase Transformations in Materials; Wiley-

VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany, 2005; pp 583 -- 654. 

(8)   Abrahams, S. C. Ferroelasticity. Mater. Res. Bull. 1971, 6 (10), 881 -- 890. 

(9)   Comès, R.; Lambert, M.; Guinier, A. Désordre Linéaire Dans Les Cristaux (Cas Du 

Silicium, Du Quartz, et Des Pérovskites Ferroélectriques). Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A 1970, 

26 (2), 244 -- 254. 

(10)   Zhong, W.; Vanderbilt, D.; Rabe, K. M. Phase Transitions in BaTiO3 from First 

Principles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1994, 73 (13), 1861 -- 1864.  

(11)   Cohen, R. E. Origin of Ferroelectricity in Perovskite Oxides. Nature 1992, 358 (6382), 

136 -- 138. 

(12)   Ravel, B.; Stern, E. A.; Vedrinskii, R. I.; Kraizman, V. Local Structure and the Phase 

Transitions of BaTiO3. Ferroelectrics 1998, 206 (1), 407 -- 430.  

(13)   Zalar, B.; Lebar, A.; Seliger, J.; Blinc, R.; Laguta, V. V.; Itoh, M. NMR Study of Disorder 

in BaTiO3 and SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 71 (6), 064107.  

(14)   Gruverman, A. Scanning Force Microscopy for the Study of Domain Structure in 

Ferroelectric Thin Films. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct. 1996, 14 

(2), 602. 

(15)   Limboeck, T.; Soergel, E. Evolution of Ferroelectric Domain Patterns in BaTiO3 at the 

Orthorhombic <=> Tetragonal Phase Transition. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105 (15), 152901. 

(16)   Lummen, T. T. A.; Gu, Y.; Wang, J.; Lei, S.; Xue, F.; Kumar, A.; Barnes, A. T.; Barnes, 

 

16 

E.; Denev, S.; Belianinov, A.; et al. Thermotropic Phase Boundaries in Classic 

Ferroelectrics. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5. 

(17)   Döring, J.; Eng, L. M.; Kehr, S. C. Low-Temperature Piezoresponse Force Microscopy on 

Barium Titanate. J. Appl. Phys. 2016, 120 (8), 084103. 

(18)   Li, J.; Nagaraj, B.; Liang, H.; Cao, W.; Lee, C. H.; Ramesh, R. Ultrafast Polarization 

Switching in Thin-Film Ferroelectrics. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2004, 84 (7), 1174 -- 1176.  

(19)   Shur, V.; Rumyantsev, E.; Makarov, S. Kinetics of Phase Transformations in Real Finite 

Systems: Application to Switching in Ferroelectrics. J. Appl. Phys. 1998, 84 (1), 445 -- 451.  

(20)   Nelson, C. T.; Gao, P.; Jokisaari, J. R.; Heikes, C.; Adamo, C.; Melville, A.; Baek, S. H.; 

Folkman, C. M.; Winchester, B.; Gu, Y.; et al. Domain Dynamics during Ferroelectric 

Switching. Science 2011, 334 (6058), 968 -- 971. 

(21)   Gruverman, A.; Wu, D.; Scott, J. F. Piezoresponse Force Microscopy Studies of 

Switching Behavior of Ferroelectric Capacitors on a 100-Ns Time Scale. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

2008, 100 (9), 097601. 

(22)   Shvartsman, V. V.; Kholkin, A. L. Evolution of Nanodomains in 0.9PbMg1/3Nb2/3O3-

0.1PbTiO3 Single Crystals. J. Appl. Phys. 2007, 101 (6), 064108. 

(23)   Ishibashi, Y.; Takagi, Y. Note on Ferroelectric Domain Switching. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 

1971, 31 (2), 506 -- 510. 

(24)   Tybell, T.; Paruch, P.; Giamarchi, T.; Triscone, J.-M. Domain Wall Creep in Epitaxial 

Ferroelectric Pb(Zn0.2Ti0.8)O3 Thin Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89 (9), 097601. 

(25)   Salje, E. K. H. Ferroelastic Materials. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2012, 42 (1), 265 -- 283. 

 

17 

(26)   Scott, J. F.; Hershkovitz, A.; Ivry, Y.; Lu, H.; Gruverman, A.; Gregg, J. M. Superdomain 

Dynamics in Ferroelectric-Ferroelastic Films: Switching, Jamming, and Relaxation. 

Applied Physics Reviews. AIP Publishing LLC December 1, 2017, p 041104. 

(27)   McQuaid, R. G. P.; Campbell, M. P.; Whatmore, R. W.; Kumar, A.; Gregg, J. M. Injection 

and Controlled Motion of Conducting Domain Walls in Improper Ferroelectric Cu-Cl 

Boracite. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 15105. 

(28)   Spanier, J. E.; Kolpak, A. M.; Urban, J. J.; Grinberg, I.; Ouyang, L.; Yun, W. S.; Rappe, 

A. M.; Park, H. Ferroelectric Phase Transition in Individual Single-Crystalline BaTiO3 

Nanowires. Nano Lett. 2006, 6 (4), 735 -- 739. 

(29)   Jarrier, R.; Marti, X.; Herrero-Albillos, J.; Ferrer, P.; Haumont, R.; Gemeiner, P.; Geneste, 

G.; Berthet, P.; Schülli, T.; Cevc, P.; et al. Surface Phase Transitions in BiFeO3 below 

Room Temperature. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 85 (18), 184104. 

(30)   Note that according to our observations, the wavelength progression speed depends on the 

temperature-change rate. That is, for slower heating, the wavefront progression speed will 

remain linear, but will scale according to the relative change in heating rate. 

(31)   Marton, P.; Rychetsky, I.; Hlinka, J. Domain Walls of Ferroelectric BaTiO3 within the 

Ginzburg-Landau-Devonshire Phenomenological Model. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter 

Mater. Phys. 2010, 81 (14), 144125. 

(32)   Ivry, Y.; Chu, D. P.; Durkan, C. Bundles of Polytwins as Meta-Elastic Domains in the 

Thin Polycrystalline Simple Multi-Ferroic System PZT. Nanotechnology 2010, 21 (6), 

065702. 

(33)   Eisenschmidt, C.; Langhammer, H. T.; Steinhausen, R.; Schmidt, G. Tetragonal-

 

18 

Orthorhombic Phase Transition in Barium Titanate via Monoclinic M C Type Symmetry. 

Ferroelectrics 2012, 432 (1), 103 -- 116. 

(34)   Noheda, B.; Cox, D. E.; Shirane, G.; Gonzalo, J. A.; Cross, L. E.; Park, S.-E. A 

Monoclinic Ferroelectric Phase in the Pb(Zr1−xTix)O3 Solid Solution. Appl. Phys. Lett. 

1999, 74 (14), 2059. 

(35)   Cohen, R. E. Origin of Ferroelectricity in Perovskite Oxides. Nature 1992, 358 (6382), 

136 -- 138. 

(36)   Rubin, D. M.; Hunter, R. E. Bedform Climbing in Theory and Nature. Sedimentology 

1982, 29 (1), 121 -- 138. 

(37)   Laabidi, K.; Fontana, M. D.; Maglione, M.; Jannot, B.; Müller, K. A. Indications of Two 

Separate Relaxators in the Subphonon Region of Tetragonal BaTiO3. EPL 1994, 26 (4), 

309 -- 314. 

(38)   Nagarajan, V.; Roytburd, A.; Stanishevsky, A.; Prasertchoung, S.; Zhao, T.; Chen, L.; 

Melngailis, J.; Auciello, O.; Ramesh, R. Dynamics of Ferroelastic Domains in 

Ferroelectric Thin Films. Nat. Mater. 2003, 2 (1), 43 -- 47. 

(39)   Tybell, T.; Paruch, P.; Giamarchi, T.; Triscone, J.-M. Domain Wall Creep in Epitaxial 

Ferroelectric Pb(Zn0.2Ti0.8)O3 Thin Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2002, 89 (9), 097601. 

(40)   Lifshitz, I. M.; Slyozov, V. V. The Kinetics of Precipitation from Supersaturated Solid 

Solutions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1961, 19 (1 -- 2), 35 -- 50. 

(41)   Roitburd, A. L. Equilibrium Structure of Epitaxial Layers. Phys. Status Solidi 1976, 37 

(1), 329 -- 339. 

(42)   Scott, J. F.; Paz de Araujo, C. A.; Antognazza, L.; Char, K.; Hammond, R. H.; Beasley, 

 

19 

M. R.; Fischer, Ø.; Triscone, J.-M.; Scott, J. F.; Araujo, C. A. P. de; et al. Ferroelectric 

Memories. Science 1989, 246 (4936), 1400 -- 1405. 

(43)   Abrahams, S. C. Ferroelasticity. Mater. Res. Bull. 1971, 6 (10), 881 -- 890. 

(44)   Marton, P.; Rychetsky, I.; Hlinka, J. Domain Walls of Ferroelectric BaTiO3 within the 

Ginzburg-Landau-Devonshire Phenomenological Model. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter 

Mater. Phys. 2010, 81 (14), 144125. 

(45)   Kalinin, S. V.; Jesse, S.; Rodriguez, B. J.; Chu, Y. H.; Ramesh, R.; Eliseev, E. A.; 

Morozovska, A. N. Probing the Role of Single Defects on the Thermodynamics of 

Electric-Field Induced Phase Transitions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100 (15), 155703. 

(46)   Jona, F.; Pepinsky, R. Symmetry of the Low-Temperature Phase of BaTi     O   3. Phys. 

Rev. 1957, 105 (3), 861 -- 864. 

 

Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Prof. James F. Scott as well as Prof. Stanislav Kamba 

for  helpful  discussions.  We  would  like  to  acknowledge  Dr.  Maria  Koifman  and  Dr.  Kamira 

Weinferd-Cohen  for  their  support  with  the  XRD  and  XPS  experiments,  respectively.  We 

acknowledges financial support from the Zuckerman STEM Leadership Program, the Russel Barry 

Nanoscience Institute, Eliyahu Pen Research Fund as well as from the Israel Science Foundation 

(ISF) grant # 1602/17. 

 

20 

Supporting Information: 

 

Figure SI1  Crystallographic analysis of the displacive-diffusive transition. (A) A closer look 

at  the  tetragonal-orthorhombic  border  (taken  from  Figure  1I)  shows  45⁰  orientation  of  the 

orthorhombic domain walls with respect to the pseudo-cubic structure. The cusp of the tetragonal 

c  domain  within  the  zigzag  wavefront  is  ~11⁰.  (B)  Such  a  configuration  corresponds  to  the 

energetically preferred O60 domains calculated by Marton et al.,44 giving rise to 60⁰ polarization 

orientation  (highlighted  with  arrows).  Here,  the  domains  slides  along  the  twin  plane  of 

(0.7,0.13, 0.7). Domain gliding along this plane is projected to a top-view angle of ~11⁰ wall, in 

agreement to the insert in (A). (C) The local crystallographic structure complies with the larger 

scale phase boundary (designated by 𝛼), which is also ~45⁰. The closer look at (A) illustrates also 

that although the c-domain cusp is tetragonal, the a-domain cusp is still orthorhombic, indicating 

on a variation in transition rates for the different crystallographic orientations. 

 

21 

 

Figure SI2  Orthorhombic-to-tetragonal domain transformation. Given the crystallographic 

configuration in Figure SI1, there are two possibilities (both have a two-fold elastic symmetry and 

four-fold electric symmetry) for the orthorhombic crystal to transfer to a tetragonal c domain (A-

B), and only one possibility (also with a two-fold elastic symmetry) to transfer to a tetragonal a 

domain (C). 

We propose that the higher probability to transfer to a tetragonal c domain is translated here to 

a faster progression of these domains highlighted in Figure SI1. Bearing in mind the orthorhombic-

tetragonal  configuration  of  the  framework  of  Marton  et  al.,31    there  are  eight  options  for  the 

orthorhombic phase to transfer to a tetragonal c domains and only four to transfer to an a domain. 

We propose that this difference in probability is translated into a variation in transformation speed. 

This proposal is supported by the observation of a tetragonal cusp in the tetragonal c-domain region 

of the wavefront and an orthorhombic cusp at the a domains (Figure 1 and Figure SI1). This speed 

difference may add to the strain imposed by native defects, contributing to the observed local and 

temporary variations in the opening angle around the 11⁰. We suggest that this variation in speed 

which is either due to the native defects or due to the wavefront dynamics gives rise to a shear 

strain, which in turn produces pinning sites or a nucleation platform for the non-tetragonal island 

domains  that  are  discussed  in  Figure  3.35,45  Crystallographic  orientations  of  the  orthorhombic 

 

22 

structure  are  highlighted  with a' and b' with  respect  to  the  quasi-cubic  structure,  while  the 

tetragonal orientations are designated with a and c. Therefore, although the wavefront progression 

seems  to  be  the  dominant  mechanism  of  the  unperturbed  crystal,  the  island  domains  are  of  a 

diffusive  nature  that  stems  from  local  defects  rather  than  due  to  a  displacive  transition  along  a 

permitted crystallographic gliding plane. 

 

 

Figure  SI3    X-ray  diffraction  of  the  BaTiO3  at  room  temperature.  Broad-spectrum 

measurement  reveals the existence of a BaTiO3 single crystal only with peaks of the three first 

orders  of  the  Bragg  diffraction.  Inset:  high-resolution  measurement  around  the  second-order 

diffraction  indicating  on  a  clear  separation  between  the  out-of-plane  and  in-plane  ferroelastic 

domain signals, corresponding to 0.398 nm and 0.402 nm of the a and c lattice parameters, and in 

agreement with the literature, including the seminal measurements of Megaw.1,46 

 

23 

 

 

Figure SI4  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of the BaTiO3 single crystal. (a) Broad spectral 

survey. A closer look at the (b) oxygen, (c) BaTiO3 and (d) titanium peaks reveals the purity of 

the single crystal. Small percentage of carbon surfactants exist on the native sample.  

 

 

 

24 

Videos SI1-3 

Video  SI1    Wavefront  progression  and  rippling  at  the  phase  transition  (LINK).  Time 

evolution of the tetragonal wavefront that penetrates the orthorhombic phase (Left) observed with 

amplitude lateral PFM alongside topography wrinkling at the adjacent orthorhombic phase (Right). 

Time follows Figure 1.  

Video  SI2    Depinning  relaxation  of  pinned  island  domains  (LINK).  Time  evolution  of 

depinning relaxation of island domains that were pinned after the wavefront had passed, showing 

a much slower process than the wavefront progression (Video SI1). Time follows Figure 1. 

Video SI3  Zipping of striped tetragonal domains (LINK). Time evolution of three sequential 

zipping relaxation events in striped tetragonal domains (Left- amplitude lateral PFM) as well as of 

the measured location of the zipping apex after the wavefront completed progressing in the area. 

The characterized kinetics (Right) show that each zipping event is of a constant speed, while the 

speed decreases between the sequential domain coalescence events. Representative data from the 

first zipping event are presented in Figure 5. Time follows Figure 1. 

 

25 

