Si CMOS Platform for Quantum Information Processing 

L. Hutin1, R. Maurand2, D. Kotekar-Patil2, A. Corna2, H. Bohuslavskyi1,2,  

X. Jehl2, S. Barraud1, S. De Franceschi2, M. Sanquer2, M. Vinet1 

1 CEA, LETI, Minatec Campus, F-38054 Grenoble, France        2 CEA, INAC-PHELIQS, F-38054 Grenoble, France 

e-mail: louis.hutin@cea.fr ; silvano.defranceschi@cea.fr  

 

Abstract 

   We  report  the  first  quantum  bit  (qubit)  device  implemented  on  a 
foundry-compatible  Si  CMOS  platform.  The  device,  fabricated  using 
SOI NanoWire MOSFET technology, is in essence a compact two-gate 
pFET.  The  qubit  is  encoded  in  the  spin  degree  of  freedom  of  a  hole 
Quantum  Dot  (QD)  defined  by  one  of  the  Gates.  Coherent  spin 
manipulation is performed by means of an RF E-Field signal applied to 
the Gate itself. By demonstrating qubit functionality in a conventional 
transistor-like layout and process flow, this result bears relevance for the 
future  up-scaling  of  qubit  architectures,  including  the  opportunity  of 
their co-integration with "classical" Si CMOS control circuitry. 

Introduction 

   Owing to the quantum superposition and entanglement principles, an 
N-qubit state is characterized by 2N complex coefficients corresponding 
to  the  normalized  probabilities  for  each  possible  arrangement  of  basis 
states (Figure 1). This built-in parallelism in information treatment, if 
harnessed by proper algorithms [1], holds great promise for a variety of 
applications  such  as  secure  data  exchange,  database  search,  machine 
learning, and simulation of quantum processes. Electron spin qubits in 
coupled  semiconductor  Quantum  Dots  [2]  increasingly  emerge  as  a 
promising  alternative  to  the  leading  superconducting-based  solid-state 
approach. Notably, recent work in nuclear spin-free isotopically pure 28Si 
has  exhibited  remarkably  long  quantum  coherence  times  [3],[4]; 
benefitting from a fundamental advantage over hitherto prevalent III-V 
materials  [5]. This has spurred a sudden interest in Si-based spin qubits 
in the fundamental research community.  At a practical level though, a 
major  remaining  challenge  thus  far  was  the  prototyping  of  a  truly 
foundry-compatible  quantum  information  building  block,  compact 
enough to consider circuits controlling hundreds of qubits and beyond. 
The following results represent a significant step in this direction. 

Gate-Defined Quantum Dots 

  Prior to manipulating its spin, a first requirement is the ability to confine 
an  elementary  charge  in  a  potential  well  separated  from  carriers 
reservoirs by tunnel barriers. A single dopant atom in the Si lattice can 
provide  an  ultimately  abrupt  potential  well,  but  such  an  approach 
requires  the  development of  deterministic  doping  techniques  [6]. Ours 
consists in using the Gates of MOSFETs to create Quantum Dots (QDs) 
and leveraging the Coulomb Blockade (CB) effect. Figure 2 shows how 
NanoWire (NW) FETs with Wrap-Around Gate and wide spacers on thin 
undoped  SOI  are  particularly  suitable  for  observing  well  resolved 
Coulomb  diamonds.  Our  process  fabrication  flow  and  cross  sections 
Figure 3 illustrate the practical implementation; a thermal oxidation was 
performed  after  mesa  patterning  in  order  to  further  reduce  the  NW 
diameter. A 7nm SiO2 thickness was left before Gate stack deposition in 
order to keep the high- interface away from the dot in an effort to limit 
noise  and  charge  fluctuations.  The  obtained  Wrap-around  Gate 
configuration  compensates  for  the  EOT  increase  and  contributes  to 
improving the electrostatic control of the QD by the Gate. Wide spacers 
keep stray dopants away from the dot, reduce the lateral CS and CD, and 
provide sufficiently large resistance to achieve proper confinement. Note 
that the backside substrate can also be used as an additional Gate to chisel 
the  potential  profile  along  the  channel.  The  most  aggressively  scaled 
devices (L=10nm, NW Ø=3.4nm) exhibited Coulomb oscillations even 
at  room  temperature  [7].  However  a  mere  metallic  island-like  CB 
behavior  is  not  sufficient  for  our  purpose  since  the  ability  to  split  the 
"spin-up"  and  "spin-down"  energy  levels  requires  a  discrete  energy 
spectrum in the dot. In the range of  manufacturable L×W dimensions, 
such  quantization  can  be  resolved  at  very  low  temperatures,  typically 
below 1K. Figure 4 shows the Coulomb diamonds obtained by plotting 
the  conductivity  vs.  (VGS,  VDS)  in  our  SOI  NWpFETs  at  T=100mK 
(L=25nm, Wtop=15nm). This type of stability diagram maps the number 
of elementary charges stored in the QD. After single charge confinement, 
the  next  step  is  to  evidence  a  successful  spin  manipulation,  which 
requires the implementation of a spin-charge conversion scheme.  

Spin-charge conversion: Pauli Spin Blockade in Coupled QDs 

  A geometry of two adjacent Gates over a common NW leads to form 
two coupled dots in series (Figure 5). In this configuration, the Source-
Drain current may be sensitive to spin orientation due to the Pauli Spin 
Blockade (PSB) effect [8]. According to the Pauli Exclusion Principle, 
two  identical  fermions  (eg  holes)  cannot  coexist  in  the  same  quantum 

state. Hence, if both QDs are in the same spin state, no charge transfer 
can occur between them. The signature of two coupled dots in series is 
well-known  as  a  honeycomb  network  with  double-triangles  Figure  6, 
further  details  can  be  found  in  [8].  A  manifestation  of  PSB  can  be 
observed  at  the  boundary  between  charge  states  "(1,1)"  and  "(0,2)"  as 
the disappearing base of the double-triangle. Therefore in the established 
range  of  (VG1,  VG2,  VDS)  PSB  biasing  conditions,  an  induced  spin 
rotation in one of the two dots will be detected as a current increase. Note 
that quantum coupling between QDs is one of the more difficult issues 
to  tackle.  In  the  future,  long-range  coupling  solutions  may  be  key 
enablers  towards  circuit  upscaling.  A  65nm  Gate  pitch  seems  to  be 
sufficient  to  guarantee  nearest  neighbor  interactions  at  the  considered 
temperatures.  This  was  achieved  in  this  work  via  e-beam  lithography, 
though  these  dimensions  are  within  reach  of  conventional  optical 
lithography with multiple patterning [9].  

Coherent Spin Control by RF Electric Field 

  Lifting the spin degeneracy (Figure 7) can be done by applying a static 
magnetic  field  B,  resulting  in  a  separation  of  the  "spin-up"  and  "spin-
down"  states  by  the  Zeeman  energy  EZ=gµBB,  where  g  is  a 
dimensionless quantity related to the gyromagnetic ratio of the particle, 
and µB is the Bohr magneton. Spin resonance is triggered if the energy 
of  an  electromagnetic  excitation  wave  h.f  matches  exactly  EZ.  The 
straightforward way to manipulate the spin is to induce electron or hole 
spin  resonance  via  RF  magnetic  field  [3],[4].  However  this  implies  i/ 
coping  with  non-local  effects  of  the  magnetic  field  bleeding  out  to 
influence neighboring devices, ii/ additional strip lines preferably made 
of a superconducting material to limit Joule effect thermal dissipation. 
Alternately,  under  some  conditions  such  as  the  existence  of  spin-orbit 
coupling or the possibility to perform g-tensor modulation resonance (g-
TMR), an E-field RF excitation alone may also lead to spin transitions 
(cf. electrons in InAs [10], holes in InSb [11]).  In Si, spin-orbit coupling 
is present in the Valence Band [12]. It was also recently shown that the 
criteria were met for the "g-TMR" phenomenon to occur for holes in our 
pFET devices [13]. Electric-field manipulation can thus be implemented 
by  applying  an  RF  signal  directly  to  the  MOSFET  Gate  defining  the 
tested  QD.  Indeed,  a  line  of  higher  Drain-to-Source  conductivity  does 
appear when plotting the PSB current against the strength of the static 
magnetic field B for various frequencies, verifying the Zeeman energy 
equation (Figure 8). It is the first observation of an Electrically-Driven 
Spin  Resonance  (EDSR)  for  a  hole  QD  in  Si.  A  potential  interest  of 
manipulating  holes  is  their  alleged  immunity  to  nuclear  spin-mediated 
decoherence which may occur via hyperfine coupling in natural Si [14]. 
The EDSR signal itself is not a proof that coherent control is achieved, 
i.e.  that  the  qubit  state  can  be  placed  arbitrarily  on  the  Bloch  sphere 
Figure 1. The spin rotation angle is function of the RF burst duration. 
Using the scheme described in Figure 9, inter-dot charge movement can 
be  suppressed  by  sitting  in  CB  conditions  during  a  spin  manipulation, 
before  lifting  it  and  reading  the  PSB  current.  Said  current  versus  burst 
exhibits the so-called Rabi oscillations Figure 10, for which the maxima 
correspond  to  a    (mod  2)  spin  rotation.  Characteristic  of  Rabi 
oscillations,  the  period  and  thus  the  spin  manipulation  speed  is 
proportional  to  P1/2.  In  summary,  this  shows  that  we  were  able  to 
initialize the spin of a single charge isolated in a quantum dot, control 
the  weighted  superposition  of  its  "spin-down"  and  "spin-up"  states, 
couple it to a near neighbor and read it out. 

Perspectives and Conclusion 

   We  successfully  demonstrated  the  first  electrically-driven  hole  spin 
qubits in Si using SOI NanoWire CMOS technology, and leveraging the 
Field-Effect  for  both  charge  confinement  and  spin  manipulation.  We 
described  one  way  to  detect  a  change  in  spin  orientation  via  DC 
transport. More advanced techniques enabling high-fidelity single-shot 
readout are currently under investigation, such as dispersive readout/RF 
reflectometry  [15],[16].  Regarding  the  prospect  of  future  possible  co-
integration of qubits with classical control electronics, we have recently 
reported  a  first  demonstration of  a  ring  oscillator  capable of  operating 
down to 1K [17]. Though we are still witnessing the very early stages of 
Si-based  electron/hole  spin-based  quantum  information,  these  results 
suggest  that  the  experience  and know-how  accumulated  while  chasing 
Moore's law might prove unexpectedly useful in the materialization of 
profoundly new computational paradigms in the decades to come.  

 

 

 

Fig.1:  Bloch  sphere  representation  of  the 
quantum  state  space.  A  qubit  state  can  be 
described  by  a 
linear  combination  of 
eigenstates e.g. "spin-up" and "spin-down". 

Fig.2:  A  Gate-controlled  Quantum  Dot  flanked  by 
tunnel  junctions  exhibits  Coulomb  Blockade  (CB) 
operation when Ec >> kT, which means it is possible 
to control the exact number of charges in the dot. 

Fig.3:  Simplified  process  flow  and  TEM  cross-sections 
along  the  Wrap-around  Gate  (top)  and  along  the  channel 
(bottom)  of  SOI  NanoWire  pFETs.  Wide  spacers  are 
primarily used for proper Gate-defined dot confinement. 

 

Fig. 4: Left  --  principle of the conductivity mapping vs. (VGS, VDS) in a pFET, 
exhibiting Coulomb diamonds of zero conductivity. The N=0 diamond is wider 
due to the sub-threshold regime. A better resolution is achieved when ≈1, EC 
is large and T is low. Right  --  experimental data from a single SOI NWpFET 
(L=25nm; W=15nm) measured at T=100mK. 

 

 
Implementation  of 
Fig.5: 
spin-charge 
conversion 
scheme  through  Pauli  Spin 
Blockade (PSB). a) Top view 
SEM  of  a  device  with  two 
gates 
in  series  (L=30nm, 
W=30nm, inter-Gate spacing 
Sgg=35nm). The wide spacers 
protect the inter-Gate spacing 
from dopant implantation. b) 
cross-sectional  sketch  along 
the  channel  showing 
the 
Valence  Band  profile  with 
the sub-spacer tunnel barriers 
and the quantization of states 
in  the  Gate-defined  dots.  (c) 
Principle  of  Pauli  Spin 
Blockade  conditioning  the 
transition  from  the  (1,1)  to 
(0,2) charge states. 

 

 

 

Fig.6:  Left  --  Principle of the conductivity mapping vs (VG1, 
VG2).  A  characteristic  honeycomb  network  is  obtained  with 
"double-triangles", the bases of which correspond to ground 
state  transport.  Right   --   experimental  measurement  at  the 
"(1,1)",  "(0,2)"  transition  showing  evidence  of  Pauli  Spin 
Blockade,  i.e.  a  disappearing  base.  The  3He  measurement 
setup base temperature is 15mK in the following. 
 

  

Fig.7:  Principle  of  Zeeman 
splitting  for  spin-½  particles: 
lifting  of  the  spin  degeneracy 
under a static magnetic field. The 
energy  separation  is  the  gµBB 
product. 

 

 
 
Fig.9: Principle of the protocol for resolving 
Rabi  oscillations.  The  QD  potentials  are 
detuned 
in  CB  conditions  during  spin 
manipulation to prevent current from flowing 
before the readout step. 

 
 
 
Fig.10:  Rabi  oscillations  of  measured  Source-
Drain  current  vs.  burst  (see  Fig.  9).  The  period 
varies  with  P1/2.  This  demonstrates  coherent 
control of the hole spin orientation by the Gate. 

 

Fig.8:  Measured Electrically  Driven  Spin Resonance  (EDSR) 
signals.  Spin  transitions  can  occur  if  the  energy  of  an  EM 
excitation  matches  the  Zeeman  energy.  Here,  the  Pauli  Spin 
Blockade  is  lifted  using  only  an  E-field  excitation  on  the  G1 
Gate. Plotting the current versus static magnetic field strength 
for  various  E-field  frequencies  yields  spikes  located  along  a 
line verifying the equation hf=EZ=gµBB. 
 
References 
[1]  http://math.nist.gov/quantum/zoo/  [2]  D.  Loss,  D.  P.  DiVincenzo, 
Phys.  Rev.  A,  57,  120,  Jan.  1998  [3]  M.  Veldhorst  et  al.,  Nature 
Nanotechnol., 9, Oct. 2014 [4] J. Muhonen et al., Nature Nanotechnol., 
9,  Oct.  2014  [5]  H.  Bluhm  et  al.,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.,  105,  216803,  Nov. 
2010  [6]  M.  Y.  Simmons,  IEEE  IEDM  2015  [7]  R.  Lavieville  et  al., 
Nano  Letters,  15,  5  (2015)  [8]  R.  Hanson  et  al.,  Rev.  Mod.  Phys.,  79, 
1217, Oct. 2007 [9] S. Natarajan et al., IEEE IEDM 2014 [10] S. Nadj-
Perge  et  al.,  Nature,  468,  Dec.  2010  [11]  V.  S.  Pribiag  et  al.,  Nature 
Nanotechnol., 8, Feb. 2013 [12] R. Li et al., Nano Letters, 15, 11 (2015) 
[13] B. Voisin et al., Nano Letters, 16, 1, 88-92 (2016) [14] G. de Lange 
et  al.,  Science,  330,  6000,  Oct.  2010  [15]  A.  Orlov  et  al.,  IEEE 
Nanotechnol. Mag., June 2015 [16] A. C. Betz et al., Nano Letters, 15 
(2015) [17] P. Clapera et al., Phys. Rev. App., 4, 044009 (2015)  

Acknowledgment   --   The  authors  acknowledge  financial 
support from the EU under Projects SiSPIN (No. 323841) and 
SiAM (No. 610637). 
 

N-qubitstate: 2Narrangements of eigenstates, 2Ncharacteristiccomplexcoefficients1-qubit:  superposition of 2 eigenstatesCGCS, RtSCD, RtDVGVSVDSelf-capacitanceChargingenergyLever parameter26 kWMin. tunnel resistanceWrap-aroundGateWide spacers, thinSOINanoWire, ScaledLVGSN=1N=0N=2White diamonds= no currentflowL = 25nm; W = 15nm; TSi= 10nm; EOT = 7.4nm; T = 100mKkT/e ≈ 8.6µeV  <<  EC/e ≈ 24.5meVVDSpFETin the few-holeregimes300mm SOI wafers TSi/TBOx= 8nm/145nmActive mesa patterning7nm thermal oxidationHigh-k/MG stackdep. & patterning1.9nm HfSiON/5nm TiN/50nm Poly Si 64nm pitch1stspacer25nm SiNRaisedS/D epi18nm Si2ndspacerHDD implant and annealLDD implant and annealSalicideand BEOLa-SiSiO2BOXLG10nmTSi=7.8nmTSiO2=7nm3.4nm7nm5nm20nmSiO2LG20nma-SiSiO2BOXLG10nmTSi=7.8nmTSiO2=7nm3.4nm7nm5nm20nmSiO2LG5nmT=100mKT=100mKW=15nmL=25nmVDS(mV)dID/ dVDS(nS)VGS(mV)EnergyE MagneticField BDE=EZ=gµBB0m=+1/2m=-1/2E= m.g.µB.BburstPauli Spin BlockadeCoulomb BlockadeSpinResonanceInitializationReadoutManipulationTimeVG1Pauli Spin BlockadeVG1VG2(0,0)(1,1)(2,2)(2,1)(2,0)(1,0)(1,2)(0,2)(0,1)VDS≠ 0VG2 (V)VG1 (V)VDS= -10mVBVG2VSVDfrequencyfVG1E-fieldburstStaticmagneticfieldMagneticField B (T)Frequencyf (GHz)burst(ns)P = 0dBmP = +4.75dBmπrotationπ/2 rotationinitial state0408012016000.200.40.2I(pA)I(pA)